Biomedical Entity Explorer (BEE) is a web server that can search for biomedical entities from a database of six biomedical entity types (gene, miRNA, drug, disease, single nucleotide polymorphism [SNP], pathway) and their gene associations. The search results can be explored using intersections, unions, and negations. BEE has integrated biomedical entities from 16 databases (Ensemble, PharmGKB, Genetic Home Reference, Tarbase, Mirbase, NCI Thesaurus, DisGeNET, Linked life data, UMLS, GSEA MsigDB, Reactome, KEGG, Gene Ontology, HGVD, SNPedia, and dbSNP) based on their gene associations and built a database with their synonyms, descriptions, and links containing individual details. Users can enter the keyword of one or more entities and select the type of entity for which they want to know the relationship for and by using set operations such as union, negation, and intersection, they can navigate the search results more clearly. We believe that BEE will not only be useful for biologists querying for complex associations between entities, but can also be a good starting point for general users searching for biomedical entities. BEE is accessible at (http://bike-bee.snu.ac.kr).

Genomic data are prevalent, leading to frequent encounters with uninterpreted variants or mutations with unknown mechanisms of effect. Researchers must manually aggregate data from multiple sources and across related proteins, mentally translating effects between the genome and proteome, to attempt to understand mechanisms.
P2T2 presents diverse data and annotation types in a unified protein-centric view, facilitating the interpretation of coding variants and hypothesis generation. Information from primary sequence, domain, motif, and structural levels are presented and also organized into the first Paralog Annotation Analysis across the human proteome.
Our tool assists research efforts to interpret genomic variation by aggregating diverse, relevant, and proteome-wide information into a unified interactive web-based interface. Additionally, we provide a REST API enabling automated data queries, or repurposing data for other studies.
The unified protein-centric interface presented in P2T2 will help researchers interpret novel variants identified through next-generation sequencing. Code and server link available at github.com/GenomicInterpretation/p2t2.

Advances in DNA sequencing and proteomics mean that researchers must now regularly interrogate thousands of positional gene/protein changes in order to find those relevant for potential clinical application or biological insights. The abundance of already known information on protein interactions, mechanism, and tertiary structure provides the possible means to understand these changes rapidly, though a careful and systematic integration of these diverse datasets is first needed. For this purpose, we developed Mechnetor, a tool that allows users to quickly explore and visualize integrated mechanistic data for proteins or interactions of interest. Central to the system is a careful cataloguing of diverse sources of protein interaction mechanism, and an efficient means to visualize interactions between relevant and/or known protein regions. The result is a finer resolution interaction network that provides more immediate clues as to points of intervention or mechanistic understanding. Users can import protein, interactions, genetic variants or post-translational modifications and see these data in the best known mechanistic context. We demonstrate the tool with topical examples in human genetic diseases and cancer genomics. The tool is freely available at: mechnetor.russelllab.org.

The identification of disease-causal variants is non-trivial. By mapping population variation from over 448,000 exome and genome sequences to over 81,000 experimental structures and homology models of the human proteome, we have calculated both regional intolerance to missense variation (Missense Tolerance Ratio, MTR), using a sliding window of 21–41 codons, and introduce a new 3D spatial intolerance to missense variation score (3D Missense Tolerance Ratio, MTR3D), using spheres of 5–8 Å. We show that the MTR3D is less biased by regions with limited data and more accurately identifies regions under purifying selection than estimates relying on the sequence alone. Intolerant regions were highly enriched for both ClinVar pathogenic and COSMIC somatic missense variants (Mann–Whitney U test P < 2.2 × 10−16). Further, we combine sequence- and spatial-based scores to generate a consensus score, MTRX, which distinguishes pathogenic from benign variants more accurately than either score separately (AUC = 0.85). The MTR3D server enables easy visualisation of population variation, MTR, MTR3D and MTRX scores across the entire gene and protein structure for >17,000 human genes and >42,000 alternative alternate transcripts, including both Ensembl and RefSeq transcripts. MTR3D is freely available by user-friendly web-interface and API at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/mtr3d/.

The stability of membrane proteins differs from globular proteins due to the presence of nonpolar membrane-spanning regions. Using a dataset of 929 membrane protein mutations whose effects on thermal stability (ΔTm) were experimentally determined, we found that the average ΔTm due to 190 stabilizing and 232 destabilizing mutations occurring in membrane-spanning regions are 2.43(3.1) °C and − 5.48(5.5) °C, respectively. The ΔTm values for mutations occurring in solvent-exposed regions are 2.56(2.82) and − 6.8(7.2) °C. We have systematically analyzed the factors influencing the stability of mutants and observed that changes in hydrophobicity, number of contacts between Cα atoms and frequency of aliphatic residues are important determinants of the stability change induced by mutations occurring in membrane-spanning regions. We have developed structure- and sequence-based machine learning predictors of ΔTm due to mutations specifically for membrane proteins. They showed a correlation and mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.72 and 2.85 °C, respectively, between experimental and predicted ΔTm for mutations in membrane-spanning regions on 10-fold group-wise cross-validation. The average correlation and MAE for mutations in aqueous regions are 0.73 and 3.7 °C, respectively. These MAE values are about 50% lower than standard deviations from the mean ΔTm values. The reliability of the method was affirmed on a test set of mutations occurring in evolutionary independent protein sequences. The developed MPTherm-pred server for predicting thermal stability changes upon mutations in membrane proteins is available at https://web.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo2/mpthermpred/. Our results provide insights into factors influencing the stability of membrane proteins and can aid in designing mutants that are more resistant to thermal stress.

We present ProtaBank, a repository for storing, querying, analyzing, and sharing protein design and engineering data in an actively maintained and updated database. ProtaBank provides a format to describe and compare all types of protein mutational data, spanning a wide range of properties and techniques. It features a user-friendly web interface and programming layer that streamlines data deposition and allows for batch input and queries. The database schema design incorporates a standard format for reporting protein sequences and experimental data that facilitates comparison of results across different data sets. A suite of analysis and visualization tools are provided to facilitate discovery, to guide future designs, and to benchmark and train new predictive tools and algorithms. ProtaBank will provide a valuable resource to the protein engineering community by storing and safeguarding newly generated data, allowing for fast searching and identification of relevant data from the existing literature, and exploring correlations between disparate data sets. ProtaBank invites researchers to contribute data to the database to make it accessible for search and analysis. ProtaBank is available at https://protabank.org.


Although structured proteins adopt their lowest free energy conformation in physiological conditions, the individual residues are generally not in their lowest free energy conformation. Residues that are stability weaknesses are often involved in functional regions, whereas stability strengths ensure local structural stability. The detection of strengths and weaknesses provides key information to guide protein engineering experiments aiming to modulate folding and various functional processes.
We developed the SWOTein predictor which identifies strong and weak residues in proteins on the basis of three types of statistical energy functions describing local interactions along the chain, hydrophobic forces and tertiary interactions. The large-scale analysis of the different types of strengths and weaknesses demonstrated their complementarity and the enhancement of the information they provide. Moreover, a good average correlation was observed between predicted and experimental strengths and weaknesses obtained from native hydrogen exchange data. SWOTein application to three test cases further showed its suitability to predict and interpret strong and weak residues in the context of folding, conformational changes and protein-protein binding. In summary, SWOTein is both fast and accurate and can be applied at small and large scale to analyze and modulate folding and molecular recognition processes.
The SWOTein webserver provides the list of predicted strengths and weaknesses and a protein structure visualization tool that facilitates the interpretation of the predictions. It is freely available for academic use at http://babylone.ulb.ac.be/SWOTein/.

Protein–protein interactions play a crucial role in all cellular functions and biological processes and mutations leading to their disruption are enriched in many diseases. While a number of computational methods to assess the effects of variants on protein–protein binding affinity have been proposed, they are in general limited to the analysis of single point mutations and have been shown to perform poorly on independent test sets. Here, we present mmCSM-PPI, a scalable and effective machine learning model for accurately assessing changes in protein–protein binding affinity caused by single and multiple missense mutations. We expanded our well-established graph-based signatures in order to capture physicochemical and geometrical properties of multiple wild-type residue environments and integrated them with substitution scores and dynamics terms from normal mode analysis. mmCSM-PPI was able to achieve a Pearson's correlation of up to 0.75 (RMSE = 1.64 kcal/mol) under 10-fold cross-validation and 0.70 (RMSE = 2.06 kcal/mol) on a non-redundant blind test, outperforming existing methods. Our method is freely available as a user-friendly and easy-to-use web server and API at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/mmcsm_ppi.

Protein–protein Interactions are involved in most fundamental biological processes, with disease causing mutations enriched at their interfaces. Here we present mCSM-PPI2, a novel machine learning computational tool designed to more accurately predict the effects of missense mutations on protein–protein interaction binding affinity. mCSM-PPI2 uses graph-based structural signatures to model effects of variations on the inter-residue interaction network, evolutionary information, complex network metrics and energetic terms to generate an optimised predictor. We demonstrate that our method outperforms previous methods, ranking first among 26 others on CAPRI blind tests. mCSM-PPI2 is freely available as a user friendly webserver at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/mcsm_ppi2/.

The massive amount of data generated from genome sequencing brings tons of newly identified mutations, whose pathogenic/non-pathogenic effects need to be evaluated. This has given rise to several mutation predictor tools that, in general, do not consider the specificities of the various protein groups. We aimed to develop a predictor tool dedicated to membrane proteins, under the premise that their specific structural features and environment would give different responses to mutations compared to globular proteins. For this purpose, we created TMSNP, a database that currently contains information from 2624 pathogenic and 196 705 non-pathogenic reported mutations located in the transmembrane region of membrane proteins. By computing various conservation parameters on these mutations in combination with annotations, we trained a machine-learning model able to classify mutations as pathogenic or not. TMSNP (freely available at http://lmc.uab.es/tmsnp/) improves considerably the prediction power of commonly used mutation predictors trained with globular proteins.

The ELASPIC web server allows users to evaluate the effect of mutations on protein folding and protein-protein interaction on a proteome-wide scale. It uses homology models of proteins and protein-protein interactions, which have been precalculated for several proteomes, and machine learning models, which integrate structural information with sequence conservation scores, in order to make its predictions. Since the original publication of the ELASPIC web server, several advances have motivated a revisiting of the problem of mutation effect prediction. First, progress in neural network architectures and self-supervised pre-trained has resulted in models which provide more informative embeddings of protein sequence and structure than those used by the original version of ELASPIC. Second, the amount of training data has increased several-fold, largely driven by advances in deep mutation scanning and other multiplexed assays of variant effect. Here, we describe two machine learning models which leverage the recent advances in order to achieve superior accuracy in predicting the effect of mutation on protein folding and protein-protein interaction. The models incorporate features generated using pre-trained transformer- and graph convolution-based neural networks, and are trained to optimize a ranking objective function, which permits the use of heterogeneous training data. The outputs from the new models have been incorporated into the ELASPIC web server, available at http://elaspic.kimlab.org.

Modeling the effect of mutations on protein thermodynamics stability is useful for protein engineering and understanding molecular mechanisms of disease-causing variants. Here, we report a new development of the SAAFEC method, the SAAFEC-SEQ, which is a gradient boosting decision tree machine learning method to predict the change of the folding free energy caused by amino acid substitutions. The method does not require the 3D structure of the corresponding protein, but only its sequence and, thus, can be applied on genome-scale investigations where structural information is very sparse. SAAFEC-SEQ uses physicochemical properties, sequence features, and evolutionary information features to make the predictions. It is shown to consistently outperform all existing state-of-the-art sequence-based methods in both the Pearson correlation coefficient and root-mean-squared-error parameters as benchmarked on several independent datasets. The SAAFEC-SEQ has been implemented into a web server and is available as stand-alone code that can be downloaded and embedded into other researchers’ code.

Statistical potentials, also named knowledge-based potentials, are scoring functions derived from empirical data that can be used to evaluate the quality of protein folds and protein–protein interaction (PPI) structures. In previous works we decomposed the statistical potentials in different terms, named Split-Statistical Potentials, accounting for the type of amino acid pairs, their hydrophobicity, solvent accessibility and type of secondary structure. These potentials have been successfully used to identify near-native structures in protein structure prediction, rank protein docking poses, and predict PPI binding affinities.
Here, we present the SPServer, a web server that applies the Split-Statistical Potentials to analyze protein folds and protein interfaces. SPServer provides global scores as well as residue/residue-pair profiles presented as score plots and maps. This level of detail allows users to: (1) identify potentially problematic regions on protein structures; (2) identify disrupting amino acid pairs in protein interfaces; and (3) compare and analyze the quality of tertiary and quaternary structural models.
While there are many web servers that provide scoring functions to assess the quality of either protein folds or PPI structures, SPServer integrates both aspects in a unique easy-to-use web server. Moreover, the server permits to locally assess the quality of the structures and interfaces at a residue level and provides tools to compare the local assessment between structures.

High-throughput sequencing technologies have identified millions of genetic mutations in multiple human diseases. However, the interpretation of the pathogenesis of these mutations and the discovery of driver genes that dominate disease progression is still a major challenge. Combining functional features such as protein post-translational modification (PTM) with genetic mutations is an effective way to predict such alterations. Here, we present PTMsnp, a web server that implements a Bayesian hierarchical model to identify driver genetic mutations targeting PTM sites. PTMsnp accepts genetic mutations in a standard variant call format or tabular format as input and outputs several interactive charts of PTM-related mutations that potentially affect PTMs. Additional functional annotations are performed to evaluate the impact of PTM-related mutations on protein structure and function, as well as to classify variants relevant to Mendelian disease. A total of 4,11,574 modification sites from 33 different types of PTMs and 1,776,848 somatic mutations from TCGA across 33 different cancer types are integrated into the web server, enabling identification of candidate cancer driver genes based on PTM. Applications of PTMsnp to the cancer cohorts and a GWAS dataset of type 2 diabetes identified a set of potential drivers together with several known disease-related genes, indicating its reliability in distinguishing disease-related mutations and providing potential molecular targets for new therapeutic strategies. PTMsnp is freely available at: http://ptmsnp.renlab.org.

Glutamatergic neurotransmission is crucial for brain development, wiring neuronal function, and synaptic plasticity mechanisms. Recent genetic studies showed the existence of autosomal dominant de novo GRIN gene variants associated with GRIN-related disorders (GRDs), a rare pediatric neurological disorder caused by N-methyl- d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) dysfunction. Notwithstanding, GRIN variants identification is exponentially growing and their clinical, genetic, and functional annotations remain highly fragmented, representing a bottleneck in GRD patient's stratification. To shorten the gap between GRIN variant identification and patient stratification, we present the GRIN database (GRINdb), a publicly available, nonredundant, updated, and curated database gathering all available genetic, functional, and clinical data from more than 4000 GRIN variants. The manually curated GRINdb outputs on a web server, allowing query and retrieval of reported GRIN variants, and thus representing a fast and reliable bioinformatics resource for molecular clinical advice. Furthermore, the comprehensive mapping of GRIN variants' genetic and clinical information along NMDAR structure revealed important differences in GRIN variants' pathogenicity and clinical phenotypes, shedding light on GRIN-specific fingerprints. Overall, the GRINdb and web server is a resource for molecular stratification of GRIN variants, delivering clinical and investigational insights into GRDs. GRINdb is accessible at http://lmc.uab.es/grindb.

Swiss-PO is a new web tool to map gene mutations on the 3D structure of corresponding proteins and to intuitively assess the structural implications of protein variants for precision oncology. Swiss-PO is constructed around a manually curated database of 3D structures, variant annotations, and sequence alignments, for a list of 50 genes taken from the Ion AmpliSeqTM Custom Cancer Hotspot Panel. The website was designed to guide users in the choice of the most appropriate structure to analyze regarding the mutated residue, the role of the protein domain it belongs to, or the drug that could be selected to treat the patient. The importance of the mutated residue for the structure and activity of the protein can be assessed based on the molecular interactions exchanged with neighbor residues in 3D within the same protein or between different biomacromolecules, its conservation in orthologs, or the known effect of reported mutations in its 3D or sequence-based vicinity. Swiss-PO is available free of charge or login at https://www.swiss-po.ch.

Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) play vital roles in regulating biological processes, such as cellular and signaling pathways. Hotspots are certain residues located at protein–protein interfaces that contribute more in protein–protein binding than other residues. Research on the mutational effects of hotspots is important for understanding basic aspects of protein association. Hence, various computational tools have been developed to explore the impact of mutation hotspots, which will allow a better understanding of the forces that drive PPIs. However, tools that may provide comprehensive substitutions at hotspots are still rare. Hence, there is a strong need for a new free web server to explore mutational effects of hotspots. Herein we introduce a web server named PIIMS that integrates molecular dynamics simulation and one-step free energy perturbation. It contains two main computational functions: (1) computational alanine scanning analysis to identify hotspots and (2) full mutation scanning analysis to evaluate the effects of hotspot mutations. We rigidly validated its ability to predict binding free energy changes by using large and diverse datasets including 1,341 mutations from 50 PPIs with the correlation coefficient R = 0.75. The difference from the existing tools is that PIIMS can perform further evaluation of hotspot residues with regard to their different mutations. The PIIMS web server (accessible at http://chemyang.ccnu.edu.cn/ccb/server/PIIMS/index.php) is free and open to all users without login requirements.

Predicting the effect of missense variations on protein stability and dynamics is important for understanding their role in diseases, and the link between protein structure and function. Approaches to estimate these changes have been proposed, but most only consider single-point missense variants and a static state of the protein, with those that incorporate dynamics are computationally expensive. Here we present DynaMut2, a web server that combines Normal Mode Analysis (NMA) methods to capture protein motion and our graph-based signatures to represent the wildtype environment to investigate the effects of single and multiple point mutations on protein stability and dynamics. DynaMut2 was able to accurately predict the effects of missense mutations on protein stability, achieving Pearson's correlation of up to 0.72 (RMSE: 1.02 kcal/mol) on a single point and 0.64 (RMSE: 1.80 kcal/mol) on multiple-point missense mutations across 10-fold cross-validation and independent blind tests. For single-point mutations, DynaMut2 achieved comparable performance with other methods when predicting variations in Gibbs Free Energy (ΔΔG) and in melting temperature (ΔTm). We anticipate our tool to be a valuable suite for the study of protein flexibility analysis and the study of the role of variants in disease. DynaMut2 is freely available as a web server and API at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/dynamut2.

Many high-throughput experimental technologies have been developed to assess the effects of large numbers of mutations (variation) on phenotypes. However, designing functional assays for these methods is challenging, and systematic testing of all combinations is impossible, so robust methods to predict the effects of genetic variation are needed. Most prediction methods exploit evolutionary sequence conservation but do not consider the interdependencies of residues or bases. We present EVmutation, an unsupervised statistical method for predicting the effects of mutations that explicitly captures residue dependencies between positions. We validate EVmutation by comparing its predictions with outcomes of high-throughput mutagenesis experiments and measurements of human disease mutations and show that it outperforms methods that do not account for epistasis. EVmutation can be used to assess the quantitative effects of mutations in genes of any organism. We provide pre-computed predictions for ∼7,000 human proteins at http://evmutation.org/.

Significant efforts have been invested into understanding and predicting the molecular consequences of mutations in protein coding regions, however nearly all approaches have been developed using globular, soluble proteins. These methods have been shown to poorly translate to studying the effects of mutations in membrane proteins. To fill this gap, here we report, mCSM-membrane, a user-friendly web server that can be used to analyse the impacts of mutations on membrane protein stability and the likelihood of them being disease associated. mCSM-membrane derives from our well-established mutation modelling approach that uses graph-based signatures to model protein geometry and physicochemical properties for supervised learning. Our stability predictor achieved correlations of up to 0.72 and 0.67 (on cross validation and blind tests, respectively), while our pathogenicity predictor achieved a Matthew's Correlation Coefficient (MCC) of up to 0.77 and 0.73, outperforming previously described methods in both predicting changes in stability and in identifying pathogenic variants. mCSM-membrane will be an invaluable and dedicated resource for investigating the effects of single-point mutations on membrane proteins through a freely available, user friendly web server at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/mcsm_membrane.

The AlloSigMA 2 server provides an interactive platform for exploring the allosteric signaling caused by ligand binding and/or mutations, for analyzing the allosteric effects of mutations and for detecting potential cancer drivers and pathogenic nsSNPs. It can also be used for searching latent allosteric sites and for computationally designing allosteric effectors for these sites with required agonist/antagonist activity. The server is based on the implementation of the Structure-Based Statistical Mechanical Model of Allostery (SBSMMA), which allows one to evaluate the allosteric free energy as a result of the perturbation at per-residue resolution. The Allosteric Signaling Map (ASM) providing a comprehensive residue-by-residue allosteric control over the protein activity can be obtained for any structure of interest. The Allosteric Probing Map (APM), in turn, allows one to perform the fragment-based-like computational design experiment aimed at finding leads for potential allosteric effectors. The server can be instrumental in elucidating of allosteric mechanisms and actions of allosteric mutations, and in the efforts on design of new elements of allosteric control. The server is freely available at: http://allosigma.bii.a-star.edu.sg

The separation of deleterious from benign mutations remains a key challenge in the interpretation of genomic data. Computational methods used to sort mutations based on their potential deleteriousness rely largely on conservation measures derived from sequence alignments. Here, we introduce LIST-S2, a successor to our previously developed approach LIST, which aims to exploit local sequence identity and taxonomy distances in quantifying the conservation of human protein sequences. Unlike its predecessor, LIST-S2 is not limited to human sequences but can assess conservation and make predictions for sequences from any organism. Moreover, we provide a web-tool and downloadable software to compute and visualize the deleteriousness of mutations in user-provided sequences. This web-tool contains an HTML interface and a RESTful API to submit and manage sequences as well as a browsable set of precomputed predictions for a large number of UniProtKB protein sequences of common taxa. LIST-S2 is available at: https://list-s2.msl.ubc.ca/

Maintaining wild type protein–protein interactions is essential for the normal function of cell and any mutation that alter their characteristics can cause disease. Therefore, the ability to correctly and quickly predict the effect of amino acid mutations is crucial for understanding disease effects and to be able to carry out genome-wide studies. Here, we report a new development of the SAAMBE method, SAAMBE-3D, which is a machine learning-based approach, resulting in accurate predictions and is extremely fast. It achieves the Pearson correlation coefficient ranging from 0.78 to 0.82 depending on the training protocol in benchmarking five-fold validation test against the SKEMPI v2.0 database and outperforms currently existing algorithms on various blind-tests. Furthermore, optimized and tested via five-fold cross-validation on the Cornell University dataset, the SAAMBE-3D achieves AUC of 1.0 and 0.96 on a homo and hereto-dimer test datasets. Another important feature of SAAMBE-3D is that it is very fast, it takes less than a fraction of a second to complete a prediction. SAAMBE-3D is available as a web server and as well as a stand-alone code, the last one being another important feature allowing other researchers to directly download the code and run it on their local computer. Combined all together, SAAMBE-3D is an accurate and fast software applicable for genome-wide studies to assess the effect of amino acid mutations on protein–protein interactions. The webserver and the stand-alone codes (SAAMBE-3D for predicting the change of binding free energy and SAAMBE-3D-DN for predicting if the mutation is disruptive or non-disruptive) are available.

HotSpot3D is a widely used software for identifying mutation hotspots on the 3D structures of proteins. To further assist users, we developed a new HotSpot3D web server to make this software more versatile, convenient and interactive.
The HotSpot3D web server performs data pre-processing, clustering, visualization and log-viewing on one stop. Users can interactively explore each cluster and easily re-visualize the mutational clusters within browsers. We also provide a database that allows users to search and visualize proximal mutations from 33 cancers in the Cancer Genome Atlas.

PhyreRisk is an open-access, publicly accessible web application for interactively bridging genomic, proteomic and structural data facilitating the mapping of human variants onto protein structures. A major advance over other tools for sequence-structure variant mapping is that PhyreRisk provides information on 20,214 human canonical proteins and an additional 22,271 alternative protein sequences (isoforms). Specifically, PhyreRisk provides structural coverage (partial or complete) for 70% (14,035 of 20,214 canonical proteins) of the human proteome, by storing 18,874 experimental structures and 84,818 pre-built models of canonical proteins and their isoforms generated using our in house Phyre2. PhyreRisk reports 55,732 experimentally, multi-validated protein interactions from IntAct and 24,260 experimental structures of protein complexes.
Another major feature of PhyreRisk is that, rather than presenting a limited set of precomputed variant-structure mapping of known genetic variants, it allows the user to explore novel variants using, as input, genomic coordinates formats (Ensembl, VCF, reference SNP ID and HGVS notations) and Human Build GRCh37 and GRCh38. PhyreRisk also supports mapping variants using amino acid coordinates and searching for genes or proteins of interest.
PhyreRisk is designed to empower researchers to translate genetic data into protein structural information, thereby providing a more comprehensive appreciation of the functional impact of variants. PhyreRisk is freely available at http://phyrerisk.bc.ic.ac.uk

Nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms often result in altered protein stability while playing crucial roles both in the evolution process and in the development of human diseases. Prediction of change in the thermodynamic stability due to such missense mutations will help in protein engineering endeavors and will contribute to a better understanding of different disease conditions. Here, we develop a machine-learning-based framework, viz., ProTSPoM, to estimate the change in protein thermodynamic stability arising out of single-point mutations (SPMs). ProTSPoM outperforms existing methods on the S2648 and S1925 databases and reports a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.82 (0.88) and a root-mean-squared-error of 0.92 (1.06) kcal/mol between the predicted and experimental ΔΔG values on the long-established S350 (tumor suppressor p53 protein) data set. Further, we estimate the change in thermodynamic stability for all possible SPMs in the DNA binding domain of the p53 protein. We identify single-nucleotide polymorphisms in p53 which are plausibly detrimental to its structural integrity and interaction affinity with the DNA molecule. ProTSPoM with its reliable estimates and time-efficient prediction is well suited to be integrated with existing protein engineering techniques. The ProTSPoM web server is accessible at http://cosmos.iitkgp.ac.in/ProTSPoM/.

Understanding the protein structural context and patterning on proteins of genomic variants can help to separate benign from pathogenic variants and reveal molecular consequences. However, mapping genomic coordinates to protein structures is non-trivial, complicated by alternative splicing and transcript evidence.
Here we present VarMap, a web tool for mapping a list of chromosome coordinates to canonical UniProt sequences and associated protein 3D structures, including validation checks, and annotating them with structural information.

The effect of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in coding and noncoding regions is of great interest in genetics. Although many computational methods aim to elucidate the effects of SNVs on cellular mechanisms, it is not straightforward to comprehensively cover different molecular effects. To address this, we compiled and benchmarked sequence and structure-based variant effect predictors and we computed the impact of nearly all possible amino acid and nucleotide variants in the reference genomes of Homo sapiens, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli. Studied mechanisms include protein stability, interaction interfaces, post-translational modifications and transcription factor binding sites. We apply this resource to the study of natural and disease coding variants. We also show how variant effects can be aggregated to generate protein complex burden scores that uncover protein complex to phenotype associations based on a set of newly generated growth profiles of 93 sequenced S. cerevisiae strains in 43 conditions. This resource is available through mutfunc (www.mutfunc.com), a tool by which users can query precomputed predictions by providing amino acid or nucleotide-level variants.

Human genome sequencing efforts have greatly expanded, and a plethora of missense variants identified both in patients and in the general population is now publicly accessible. Interpretation of the molecular-level effect of missense variants, however, remains challenging and requires a particular investigation of amino acid substitutions in the context of protein structure and function. Answers to questions like ‘Is a variant perturbing a site involved in key macromolecular interactions and/or cellular signaling?’, or ‘Is a variant changing an amino acid located at the protein core or part of a cluster of known pathogenic mutations in 3D?’ are crucial. Motivated by these needs, we developed MISCAST (missense variant to protein structure analysis web suite; http://miscast.broadinstitute.org/). MISCAST is an interactive and user-friendly web server to visualize and analyze missense variants in protein sequence and structure space. Additionally, a comprehensive set of protein structural and functional features have been aggregated in MISCAST from multiple databases, and displayed on structures alongside the variants to provide users with the biological context of the variant location in an integrated platform. We further made the annotated data and protein structures readily downloadable from MISCAST to foster advanced offline analysis of missense variants by a wide biological community.

Computational methods that predict protein stability changes induced by missense mutations have made a lot of progress over the past decades. Most of the available methods however have very limited accuracy in predicting stabilizing mutations because existing experimental sets are dominated by mutations reducing protein stability. Moreover, few approaches could consistently perform well across different test cases. To address these issues, we developed a new computational method PremPS to more accurately evaluate the effects of missense mutations on protein stability. The PremPS method is composed of only ten evolutionary- and structure-based features and parameterized on a balanced dataset with an equal number of stabilizing and destabilizing mutations. A comprehensive comparison of the predictive performance of PremPS with other available methods on nine benchmark datasets confirms that our approach consistently outperforms other methods and shows considerable improvement in estimating the impacts of stabilizing mutations. A protein could have multiple structures available, and if another structure of the same protein is used, the predicted change in stability for structure-based methods might be different. Thus, we further estimated the impact of using different structures on prediction accuracy, and demonstrate that our method performs well across different types of structures except for low-resolution structures and models built based on templates with low sequence identity. PremPS can be used for finding functionally important variants, revealing the molecular mechanisms of functional influences and protein design. PremPS is freely available at https://lilab.jysw.suda.edu.cn/research/PremPS/, which allows to do large-scale mutational scanning and takes about four minutes to perform calculations for a single mutation per protein with ~ 300 residues and requires ~ 0.4 seconds for each additional mutation.

The biological effects of human missense variants have been studied experimentally for decades but predicting their effects in clinical molecular diagnostics remains challenging. Available computational tools are usually based on the analysis of sequence conservation and structural properties of the mutant protein. We recently introduced a new machine learning method that demonstrated for the first time the significance of protein dynamics in determining the pathogenicity of missense variants.
Here, we present a new interface (Rhapsody) that enables fully automated assessment of pathogenicity, incorporating both sequence coevolution data and structure- and dynamics-based features. Benchmarked against a dataset of about 20 000 annotated variants, the methodology is shown to outperform well-established and/or advanced prediction tools. We illustrate the utility of Rhapsody by in silico saturation mutagenesis studies of human H-Ras, phosphatase and tensin homolog and thiopurine S-methyltransferase.
The new tool is available both as an online webserver at http://rhapsody.csb.pitt.edu and as an open-source Python package (GitHub repository: https://github.com/prody/rhapsody; PyPI package installation: pip install prody-rhapsody). Links to additional resources, tutorials and package documentation are provided in the 'Python package' section of the website.

Combined Annotation-Dependent Depletion (CADD) is a widely used measure of variant deleteriousness that can effectively prioritize causal variants in genetic analyses, particularly highly penetrant contributors to severe Mendelian disorders. CADD is an integrative annotation built from more than 60 genomic features, and can score human single nucleotide variants and short insertion and deletions anywhere in the reference assembly. CADD uses a machine learning model trained on a binary distinction between simulated de novo variants and variants that have arisen and become fixed in human populations since the split between humans and chimpanzees; the former are free of selective pressure and may thus include both neutral and deleterious alleles, while the latter are overwhelmingly neutral (or, at most, weakly deleterious) by virtue of having survived millions of years of purifying selection. Here we review the latest updates to CADD, including the most recent version, 1.4, which supports the human genome build GRCh38. We also present updates to our website that include simplified variant lookup, extended documentation, an Application Program Interface and improved mechanisms for integrating CADD scores into other tools or applications. CADD scores, software and documentation are available at https://cadd.gs.washington.edu.

Genome sequencing identifies vast number of genetic variants. Predicting these variants’ molecular and clinical effects is one of the preeminent challenges in human genetics. Accurate prediction of the impact of genetic variants improves our understanding of how genetic information is conveyed to molecular and cellular functions, and is an essential step towards precision medicine. Over one hundred tools/resources have been developed specifically for this purpose. We summarize these tools as well as their characteristics, in the genetic Variant Impact Predictor Database (VIPdb). This database will help researchers and clinicians explore appropriate tools, and inform the development of improved methods. VIPdb can be browsed and downloaded at https://genomeinterpretation.org/vipdb.

The strength of intraprotein interactions or contact network is one of the dominant factors determining the thermodynamic stabilities of proteins. The nature and the extent of connectivity of this network also play a role in allosteric signal propagation characteristics upon ligand binding to a protein domain. Here, we develop a server for rapid quantification of the strength of an interaction network by employing an experimentally consistent perturbation approach previously validated against a large data set of 375 mutations in 19 different proteins. The web server can be employed to predict the extent of destabilization of proteins arising from mutations in the protein interior in experimentally relevant units. Moreover, coupling distances—a measure of the extent of percolation on perturbation—and overall perturbation magnitudes are predicted in a residue-specific manner, enabling a first look at the distribution of energetic couplings in a protein or its changes upon ligand binding. We show specific examples of how the server can be employed to probe for the distribution of local stabilities in a protein, to examine changes in side chain orientations or packing before and after ligand binding, and to predict changes in stabilities of proteins upon mutations of buried residues. The web server is freely available at http://pbl.biotech.iitm.ac.in/pPerturb and supports recent versions of all major browsers.

Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have revolutionized the field of complex trait genetics over the past decade, yet for most of the significant genotype-phenotype associations the true causal variants remain unknown. Identifying and interpreting how causal genetic variants confer disease susceptibility is still a big challenge. Herein we introduce a new database, CAUSALdb, to integrate the most comprehensive GWAS summary statistics to date and identify credible sets of potential causal variants using uniformly processed fine-mapping. The database has six major features: it (i) curates 3052 high-quality, fine-mappable GWAS summary statistics across five human super-populations and 2629 unique traits; (ii) estimates causal probabilities of all genetic variants in GWAS significant loci using three state-of-the-art fine-mapping tools; (iii) maps the reported traits to a powerful ontology MeSH, making it simple for users to browse studies on the trait tree; (iv) incorporates highly interactive Manhattan and LocusZoom-like plots to allow visualization of credible sets in a single web page more efficiently; (v) enables online comparison of causal relations on variant-, gene- and trait-levels among studies with different sample sizes or populations and (vi) offers comprehensive variant annotations by integrating massive base-wise and allele-specific functional annotations. CAUSALdb is freely available at http://mulinlab.org/causaldb.

Correlated mutations between residue pairs in evolutionarily related proteins arise from constraints needed to maintain a functional and stable protein. Identifying these inter-related positions narrows down the search for structurally or functionally important sites. MISTIC is a server designed to assist users to calculate covariation in protein families and provide them with an interactive tool to visualize the results. Here, we present MISTIC2, an update to the previous server, that allows to calculate four covariation methods (MIp, mfDCA, plmDCA and gaussianDCA). The results visualization framework has been reworked for improved performance, compatibility and user experience. It includes a circos representation of the information contained in the alignment, an interactive covariation network, a 3D structure viewer and a sequence logo. Others components provide additional information such as residue annotations, a roc curve for assessing contact prediction, data tables and different ways of filtering the data and exporting figures. Comparison of different methods is easily done and scores combination is also possible. A newly implemented web service allows users to access MISTIC2 programmatically using an API to calculate covariation and retrieve results. MISTIC2 is available at: https://mistic2.leloir.org.ar.

Visualization of whole-genomic variations in a meaningful manner assists researchers in gaining new insights into the underlying data, especially when it comes in the context of whole genome comparisons. CircosVCF is a web based visualization tool for genome-wide variant data described in VCF files, using circos plots. The user friendly interface of CircosVCF supports an interactive design of the circles in the plot, and the integration of additional information such as experimental data or annotations. The provided visualization capabilities give a broad overview of the genomic relationships between genomes, and allow identification of specific meaningful SNPs regions.
CircosVCF was implemented in JavaScript and is available at http://www.ariel.ac.il/research/fbl/software.

Interprotein contact prediction using multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) is a useful approach to help detect protein–protein interfaces. Different computational methods have been developed in recent years as an approximation to solve this problem. However, as there are discrepancies in the results provided by them, there is still no consensus on which is the best performing methodology. To address this problem, I-COMS (interprotein COrrelated Mutations Server) is presented. I-COMS allows to estimate covariation between residues of different proteins by four different covariation methods. It provides a graphical and interactive output that helps compare results obtained using different methods. I-COMS automatically builds the required MSA for the calculation and produces a rich visualization of either intraprotein and/or interprotein covariating positions in a circos representation. Furthermore, comparison between any two methods is available as well as the overlap between any or all four methodologies. In addition, as a complementary source of information, a matrix visualization of the corresponding scores is made available and the density plot distribution of the inter, intra and inter+intra scores are calculated. Finally, all the results can be downloaded (including MSAs, scores and graphics) for comparison and visualization and/or for further analysis.

Understanding the aspects of the cell functionality that account for disease or drug action mechanisms is a main challenge for precision medicine. Here we propose a new method that models cell signaling using biological knowledge on signal transduction. The method recodes individual gene expression values (and/or gene mutations) into accurate measurements of changes in the activity of signaling circuits, which ultimately constitute high-throughput estimations of cell functionalities caused by gene activity within the pathway. Moreover, such estimations can be obtained either at cohort-level, in case/control comparisons, or personalized for individual patients. The accuracy of the method is demonstrated in an extensive analysis involving 5640 patients from 12 different cancer types. Circuit activity measurements not only have a high diagnostic value but also can be related to relevant disease outcomes such as survival, and can be used to assess therapeutic interventions.

Predict whether a mutation is deleterious based on the custom 3D model of a protein.
We have developed MODICT, a mutation prediction tool which is based on per residue RMSD (root mean square deviation) values of superimposed 3D protein models. Our mathematical algorithm was tested for 42 described mutations in multiple genes including renin (REN), beta-tubulin (TUBB2B), biotinidase (BTD), sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase-1 (SMPD1), phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) and medium chain Acyl-Coa dehydrogenase (ACADM). Moreover, MODICT scores corresponded to experimentally verified residual enzyme activities in mutated biotinidase, phenylalanine hydroxylase and medium chain Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase. Several commercially available prediction algorithms were tested and results were compared. The MODICT PERL package and the manual can be downloaded from https://github.com/IbrahimTanyalcin/MODICT.
We show here that MODICT is capable tool for mutation effect prediction at the protein level, using superimposed 3D protein models instead of sequence based algorithms used by POLYPHEN and SIFT.

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies generate thousands to millions of genetic variants per sample. Identification of potential disease-causal variants is labor intensive as it relies on filtering using various annotation metrics and consideration of multiple pathogenicity prediction scores. We have developed VPOT (variant prioritization ordering tool), a python-based command line tool that allows researchers to create a single fully customizable pathogenicity ranking score from any number of annotation values, each with a user-defined weighting. The use of VPOT can be informative when analyzing entire cohorts, as variants in a cohort can be prioritized. VPOT also provides additional functions to allow variant filtering based on a candidate gene list or by affected status in a family pedigree. VPOT outperforms similar tools in terms of efficacy, flexibility, scalability, and computational performance. VPOT is freely available for public use at GitHub (https://github.com/VCCRI/VPOT/). Documentation for installation along with a user tutorial, a default parameter file, and test data are provided.

Protein–protein interactions are essential for the cell and mediate various functions. However, mutations can disrupt these interactions and may cause diseases. Currently available computational methods require a complex structure as input for predicting the change in binding affinity. Further, they have not included the functional class information for the protein–protein complex. To address this, we have developed a method, ProAffiMuSeq, which predicts the change in binding free energy using sequence-based features and functional class.
Our method shows an average correlation between predicted and experimentally determined ΔΔG of 0.73 and mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.86 kcal/mol in 10-fold cross-validation and correlation of 0.75 with MAE of 0.94 kcal/mol in the test dataset. ProAffiMuSeq was also tested on an external validation set and showed results comparable to structure-based methods. Our method can be used for large-scale analysis of disease-causing mutations in protein–protein complexes without structural information.
Users can access the method at https://web.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo2/proaffimuseq/.

Most proteins perform their biological functions through interactions with other proteins in cells. Amino acid mutations, especially those occurring at protein interfaces, can change the stability of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and impact their functions, which may cause various human diseases. Quantitative estimation of the binding affinity changes (⁠ΔΔGbind) caused by mutations can provide critical information for protein function annotation and genetic disease diagnoses.
We present SSIPe, which combines protein interface profiles, collected from structural and sequence homology searches, with a physics-based energy function for accurate ΔΔGbind estimation. To offset the statistical limits of the PPI structure and sequence databases, amino acid-specific pseudocounts were introduced to enhance the profile accuracy. SSIPe was evaluated on large-scale experimental data containing 2204 mutations from 177 proteins, where training and test datasets were stringently separated with the sequence identity between proteins from the two datasets below 30%. The Pearson correlation coefficient between estimated and experimental ΔΔGbind was 0.61 with a root-mean-square-error of 1.93 kcal/mol, which was significantly better than the other methods. Detailed data analyses revealed that the major advantage of SSIPe over other traditional approaches lies in the novel combination of the physical energy function with the new knowledge-based interface profile. SSIPe also considerably outperformed a former profile-based method (BindProfX) due to the newly introduced sequence profiles and optimized pseudocount technique that allows for consideration of amino acid-specific prior mutation probabilities.
Web-server/standalone program, source code and datasets are freely available at https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/SSIPe and https://github.com/tommyhuangthu/SSIPe.

Accurate prediction of the effects of genetic variation is a major goal in biological research. Towards this goal, numerous machine learning models have been developed to learn information from evolutionary sequence data. The most effective method so far is a deep generative model based on the variational autoencoder (VAE) that models the distributions using a latent variable. In this study, we propose a deep autoregressive generative model named mutationTCN, which employs dilated causal convolutions and attention mechanism for the modeling of inter-residue correlations in a biological sequence.
We show that this model is competitive with the VAE model when tested against a set of 42 high-throughput mutation scan experiments, with the mean improvement in Spearman rank correlation ∼0.023. In particular, our model can more efficiently capture information from multiple sequence alignments with lower effective number of sequences, such as in viral sequence families, compared with the latent variable model. Also, we extend this architecture to a semi-supervised learning framework, which shows high prediction accuracy. We show that our model enables a direct optimization of the data likelihood and allows for a simple and stable training process.
Source code is available at https://github.com/ha01994/mutationTCN.

Normalizing sequence variants on a reference, projecting them across congruent sequences and aggregating their diverse representations are critical to the elucidation of the genetic basis of disease and biological function. Inconsistent representation of variants among variant callers, local databases and tools result in discrepancies that complicate analysis. NCBI’s genetic variation resources, dbSNP and ClinVar, require a robust, scalable set of principles to manage asserted sequence variants.
The SPDI data model defines variants as a sequence of four attributes: sequence, position, deletion and insertion, and can be applied to nucleotide and protein variants. NCBI web services convert representations among HGVS, VCF and SPDI and provide two functions to aggregate variants. One, based on the NCBI Variant Overprecision Correction Algorithm, returns a unique, normalized representation termed the ‘Contextual Allele’. The SPDI data model, with its four operations, defines exactly the reference subsequence affected by the variant, even in repeat regions, such as homopolymer and other sequence repeats. The second function projects variants across congruent sequences and depends on an alignment dataset of non-assembly NCBI RefSeq sequences (prefixed NM, NR and NG), as well as inter- and intra-assembly-associated genomic sequences (NCs, NTs and NWs), supporting robust projection of variants across congruent sequences and assembly versions. The variant is projected to all congruent Contextual Alleles. One of these Contextual Alleles, typically the allele based on the latest assembly version, represents the entire set, is designated the unique ‘Canonical Allele’ and is used directly to aggregate variants across congruent sequences.
The SPDI services are available for open access at: https://api.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/variation/v0.

Protein aggregation is a major unsolved problem in biochemistry with implications for several human diseases, biotechnology and biomaterial sciences. A majority of sequence-structural properties known for their mechanistic roles in protein aggregation do not correlate well with the aggregation kinetics. This limits the practical utility of predictive algorithms.
We analyzed experimental data on 183 unique single point mutations that lead to change in aggregation rates for 23 polypeptides and proteins. Our initial mathematical model obtained a correlation coefficient of 0.43 between predicted and experimental change in aggregation rate upon mutation (P-value <0.0001). However, when the dataset was classified based on protein length and conformation at the mutation sites, the average correlation coefficient almost doubled to 0.82 (range: 0.74–0.87; P-value <0.0001). We observed that distinct sequence and structure-based properties determine protein aggregation kinetics in each class. In conclusion, the protein aggregation kinetics are impacted by local factors and not by global ones, such as overall three-dimensional protein fold, or mechanistic factors such as the presence of aggregation-prone regions.
The web server is available at http://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/aggrerate-pred/.

The accuracy and success rate of de novo protein design remain limited, mainly due to the parameter over-fitting of current energy functions and their inability to discriminate incorrect designs from correct designs.
We developed an extended energy function, EvoEF2, for efficient de novo protein sequence design, based on a previously proposed physical energy function, EvoEF. Remarkably, EvoEF2 recovered 32.5%, 47.9% and 22.3% of all, core and surface residues for 148 test monomers, and was generally applicable to protein–protein interaction design, as it recapitulated 30.9%, 42.4%, 31.3% and 21.4% of all, core, interface and surface residues for 88 test dimers, significantly outperforming EvoEF on the native sequence recapitulation. We further used I-TASSER to evaluate the foldability of the 148 designed monomer sequences, where all of them were predicted to fold into structures with high fold- and atomic-level similarity to their corresponding native structures, as demonstrated by the fact that 87.8% of the predicted structures shared a root-mean-square-deviation less than 2 Å to their native counterparts. The study also demonstrated that the usefulness of physical energy functions is highly correlated with the parameter optimization processes, and EvoEF2, with parameters optimized using sequence recapitulation, is more suitable for computational protein sequence design than EvoEF, which was optimized on thermodynamic mutation data.
The source code of EvoEF2 and the benchmark datasets are freely available at https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/EvoEF.

Knowledge of protein structure can be used to predict the phenotypic consequence of a missense variant. Since structural coverage of the human proteome can be roughly tripled to over 50% of the residues if homology-predicted structures are included in addition to experimentally determined coordinates, it is important to assess the reliability of using predicted models when analyzing missense variants. Accordingly, we assess whether a missense variant is structurally damaging by using experimental and predicted structures. We considered 606 experimental structures and show that 40% of the 1965 disease-associated missense variants analyzed have a structurally damaging change in the mutant structure. Only 11% of the 2134 neutral variants are structurally damaging. Importantly, similar results are obtained when 1052 structures predicted using Phyre2 algorithm were used, even when the model shares low (< 40%) sequence identity to the template. Thus, structure-based analysis of the effects of missense variants can be effectively applied to homology models. Our in-house pipeline, Missense3D, for structurally assessing missense variants was made available at http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/~missense3d

Protein–protein interactions are key to understand biological processes at the molecular level. As a complement to experimental characterization of protein interactions, computational docking methods have become useful tools for the structural and energetics modeling of protein–protein complexes. A key aspect of such algorithms is the use of scoring functions to evaluate the generated docking poses and try to identify the best models. When the scoring functions are based on energetic considerations, they can help not only to provide a reliable structural model for the complex, but also to describe energetic aspects of the interaction. This is the case of the scoring function used in pyDock, a combination of electrostatics, desolvation and van der Waals energy terms. Its correlation with experimental binding affinity values of protein–protein complexes was explored in the past, but the per-residue decomposition of the docking energy was never systematically analyzed.
Here, we present pyDockEneRes (pyDock Energy per-Residue), a web server that provides pyDock docking energy partitioned at the residue level, giving a much more detailed description of the docking energy landscape. Additionally, pyDockEneRes computes the contribution to the docking energy of the side-chain atoms. This fast approach can be applied to characterize a complex structure in order to identify energetically relevant residues (hot-spots) and estimate binding affinity changes upon mutation to alanine.
The server does not require registration by the user and is freely accessible for academics at https://life.bsc.es/pid/pydockeneres.

Normal mode analysis (NMA) methods are widely used to study dynamic aspects of protein structures. Two critical components of NMA methods are coarse-graining in the level of simplification used to represent protein structures and the choice of potential energy functional form. There is a trade-off between speed and accuracy in different choices. In one extreme one finds accurate but slow molecular-dynamics based methods with all-atom representations and detailed atom potentials. On the other extreme, fast elastic network model (ENM) methods with Cα−only representations and simplified potentials that based on geometry alone, thus oblivious to protein sequence. Here we present ENCoM, an Elastic Network Contact Model that employs a potential energy function that includes a pairwise atom-type non-bonded interaction term and thus makes it possible to consider the effect of the specific nature of amino-acids on dynamics within the context of NMA. ENCoM is as fast as existing ENM methods and outperforms such methods in the generation of conformational ensembles. Here we introduce a new application for NMA methods with the use of ENCoM in the prediction of the effect of mutations on protein stability. While existing methods are based on machine learning or enthalpic considerations, the use of ENCoM, based on vibrational normal modes, is based on entropic considerations. This represents a novel area of application for NMA methods and a novel approach for the prediction of the effect of mutations. We compare ENCoM to a large number of methods in terms of accuracy and self-consistency. We show that the accuracy of ENCoM is comparable to that of the best existing methods. We show that existing methods are biased towards the prediction of destabilizing mutations and that ENCoM is less biased at predicting stabilizing mutations.

Missense mutations may affect proteostasis by destabilizing or over-stabilizing protein complexes and changing the pathway flux. Predicting the effects of stabilizing mutations on protein-protein interactions is notoriously difficult because existing experimental sets are skewed toward mutations reducing protein-protein binding affinity and many computational methods fail to correctly evaluate their effects. To address this issue, we developed a method MutaBind2, which estimates the impacts of single as well as multiple mutations on protein-protein interactions. MutaBind2 employs only seven features, and the most important of them describe interactions of proteins with the solvent, evolutionary conservation of the site, and thermodynamic stability of the complex and each monomer. This approach shows a distinct improvement especially in evaluating the effects of mutations increasing binding affinity. MutaBind2 can be used for finding disease driver mutations, designing stable protein complexes, and discovering new protein-protein interaction inhibitors.

Quantitative evaluation of binding affinity changes upon mutations is crucial for protein engineering and drug design. Machine learning-based methods are gaining increasing momentum in this field. Due to the limited number of experimental data, using a small number of sensitive predictive features is vital to the generalization and robustness of such machine learning methods. Here we introduce a fast and reliable predictor of binding affinity changes upon single point mutation, based on a random forest approach. Our method, iSEE, uses a limited number of interface Structure, Evolution, and Energy-based features for the prediction. iSEE achieves, using only 31 features, a high prediction performance with a Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of 0.80 and a root mean square error of 1.41 kcal/mol on a diverse training dataset consisting of 1102 mutations in 57 protein-protein complexes. It competes with existing state-of-the-art methods on two blind test datasets. Predictions for a new dataset of 487 mutations in 56 protein complexes from the recently published SKEMPI 2.0 database reveals that none of the current methods perform well (PCC < 0.42), although their combination does improve the predictions. Feature analysis for iSEE underlines the significance of evolutionary conservations for quantitative prediction of mutation effects. As an application example, we perform a full mutation scanning of the interface residues in the MDM2–p53 complex.

VarSite is a web server mapping known disease-associated variants from UniProt and ClinVar, together with natural variants from gnomAD, onto protein 3D structures in the Protein Data Bank. The analyses are primarily image-based and provide both an overview for each human protein, as well as a report for any specific variant of interest. The information can be useful in assessing whether a given variant might be pathogenic or benign. The structural annotations for each position in the protein include protein secondary structure, interactions with ligand, metal, DNA/RNA, or other protein, and various measures of a given variant's possible impact on the protein's function. The 3D locations of the disease-associated variants can be viewed interactively via the 3dmol.js JavaScript viewer, as well as in RasMol and PyMOL. Users can search for specific variants, or sets of variants, by providing the DNA coordinates of the base change(s) of interest. Additionally, various agglomerative analyses are given, such as the mapping of disease and natural variants onto specific Pfam or CATH domains. The server is freely accessible to all at: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/thornton-srv/databases/VarSite.

Amyloid proteins are implicated in several diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, prion diseases, etc. In order to characterize the amyloidogenicity of a given protein, it is important to locate the amyloid forming hotspot regions within the protein as well as to analyze the effects of mutations on these proteins. The biochemical and biological assays used for this purpose can be facilitated by computational means. This paper presents a machine learning method that can predict hotspot amyloidogenic regions within proteins and characterize changes in their amyloidogenicity due to point mutations. The proposed method called MILAMP (Multiple Instance Learning of AMyloid Proteins) achieves high accuracy for identification of amyloid proteins, hotspot localization, and prediction of mutation effects on amyloidogenicity by integrating heterogenous data sources and exploiting common predictive patterns across these tasks through multiple instance learning. The paper presents comprehensive benchmarking experiments to test the predictive performance of MILAMP in comparison to previously published state of the art techniques for amyloid prediction. The python code for the implementation and webserver for MILAMP is available at the URL: http://faculty.pieas.edu.pk/fayyaz/software.html#MILAMP .

Protein folding is a dynamic process through which polypeptide chains reach their native 3D structures. Although the importance of this mechanism is widely acknowledged, very few high-throughput computational methods have been developed to study it.
In this paper, we report a computational platform named P3Fold that combines statistical and evolutionary information for predicting and analyzing protein folding routes. P3Fold uses coarse-grained modeling and efficient combinatorial schemes to predict residue contacts and evaluate the folding routes of a protein sequence within minutes or hours. To facilitate access to this technology, we devise graphical representations and implement an interactive web interface that allows end-users to leverage P3Fold predictions. Finally, we use P3Fold to conduct large and short scale experiments on the human proteome that reveal the broad conservation and variations of structural intermediates within protein families.
A Web server of P3Fold is freely available at http://csb.cs.mcgill.ca/P3Fold.

Tailored therapy aims to cure cancer patients effectively and safely, based on the complex interactions between patients' genomic features, disease pathology and drug metabolism. Thus, the continual increase in scientific literature drives the need for efficient methods of data mining to improve the extraction of useful information from texts based on patients' genomic features. An important application of text mining to tailored therapy in cancer encompasses the use of mutations and cancer fusion genes as moieties that change patients' cellular networks to develop cancer, and also affect drug metabolism. Fusion proteins, which are derived from the slippage of two parental genes, are produced in cancer by chromosomal aberrations and trans-splicing. Given that the two parental proteins for predicted fusion proteins are known, we used our previously developed method for identifying chimeric protein–protein interactions (ChiPPIs) associated with the fusion proteins. Here, we present a validation approach that receives fusion proteins of interest, predicts their cellular network alterations by ChiPPI and validates them by our new method, ProtFus, using an online literature search. This process resulted in a set of 358 fusion proteins and their corresponding protein interactions, as a training set for a Naïve Bayes classifier, to identify predicted fusion proteins that have reliable evidence in the literature and that were confirmed experimentally. Next, for a test group of 1817 fusion proteins, we were able to identify from the literature 2908 PPIs in total, across 18 cancer types. The described method, ProtFus, can be used for screening the literature to identify unique cases of fusion proteins and their PPIs, as means of studying alterations of protein networks in cancers.
Availability: http://protfus.md.biu.ac.il/

Large-scale human genetics studies are now employing whole genome sequencing with the goal of conducting comprehensive trait mapping analyses of all forms of genome variation. However, methods for structural variation (SV) analysis have lagged far behind those for smaller scale variants, and there is an urgent need to develop more efficient tools that scale to the size of human populations. Here, we present a fast and highly scalable software toolkit (svtools) and cloud-based pipeline for assembling high quality SV maps—including deletions, duplications, mobile element insertions, inversions and other rearrangements—in many thousands of human genomes. We show that this pipeline achieves similar variant detection performance to established per-sample methods (e.g. LUMPY), while providing fast and affordable joint analysis at the scale of ≥100 000 genomes. These tools will help enable the next generation of human genetics studies.
svtools is implemented in Python and freely available (MIT) from https://github.com/hall-lab/svtools.

Being able to assess the phenotypic effects of mutations is a much required capability in precision medicine. However, most of the currently available structure-based methods actually predict stability changes caused by mutations rather than their pathogenic potential. There are also no dedicated methods to predict damaging mutations specifically in transmembrane proteins. In this study we developed and applied a machine-learning approach to discriminate between disease-associated and benign point mutations in the transmembrane regions of proteins with known 3D structure. The method, called BorodaTM (BOosted RegressiOn trees for Disease-Associated mutations in TransMembrane proteins), was trained on sequence-, structure-, and energy-derived descriptors. When compared with the state-of-the-art methods, BorodaTM is superior in classifying point mutations in transmembrane regions. Using BorodaTM we have conducted a large-scale mutation analysis in the transmembrane regions of human proteins with known 3D structures. For each protein we generated structural models for all point mutations by replacing each residue to 19 possible residue types. We classified ~1.8 millions point mutations as benign or diseased-associated and made all predictions available as a Web-server at https://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/MutHTP/boroda.php.

The growing availability of human genetic variation has given rise to novel methods of measuring genetic tolerance that better interpret variants of unknown significance. We recently developed a concept based on protein domain homology in the human genome to improve variant interpretation. For this purpose, we mapped population variation from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) and pathogenic mutations from the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) onto Pfam protein domains. The aggregation of these variation data across homologous domains into meta-domains allowed us to generate amino acid resolution of genetic intolerance profiles for human protein domains. Here, we developed MetaDome, a fast and easy-to-use web server that visualizes meta-domain information and gene-wide profiles of genetic tolerance. We updated the underlying data of MetaDome to contain information from 56,319 human transcripts, 71,419 protein domains, 12,164,292 genetic variants from gnomAD, and 34,076 pathogenic mutations from ClinVar. MetaDome allows researchers to easily investigate their variants of interest for the presence or absence of variation at corresponding positions within homologous domains. We illustrate the added value of MetaDome by an example that highlights how it may help in the interpretation of variants of unknown significance. The MetaDome web server is freely accessible at https://stuart.radboudumc.nl/metadome.

Clinical genetic testing has exponentially expanded in recent years, leading to an overwhelming amount of patient variants with high variability in pathogenicity and heterogeneous phenotypes. A large part of the variant level data is aggregated in public databases such as ClinVar. However, the ability to explore this rich resource and answer general questions such as ‘How many genes inside ClinVar are associated with a specific disease? or ‘In which part of the protein are patient variants located?’ is limited and requires advanced bioinformatics processing. Here, we present Simple ClinVar (http://simple-clinvar.broadinstitute.org/) a web server application that is able to provide variant, gene and disease level summary statistics based on the entire ClinVar database in a dynamic and user-friendly web-interface. Overall, our web application is able to interactively answer basic questions regarding genetic variation and its known relationships to disease. By typing a disease term of interest, the user can identify in seconds the genes and phenotypes most frequently reported to ClinVar. Subsets of variants can then be further explored, filtered or mapped and visualized in the corresponding protein sequences. Our website will follow ClinVar monthly releases and provide easy access to ClinVar resources to a broader audience including basic and clinical scientists.

Molecular simulations are used to provide insight into protein structure and dynamics, and have the potential to provide important context when predicting the impact of sequence variation on protein function. In addition to understanding molecular mechanisms and interactions on the atomic scale, translational applications of those approaches include drug screening, development of novel molecular therapies, and targeted treatment planning. Supporting the continued development of these applications, we have developed the SNP2SIM workflow that generates reproducible molecular dynamics and molecular docking simulations for downstream functional variant analysis. The Python workflow utilizes molecular dynamics software (NAMD (Phillips et al., J Comput Chem 26(16):1781-802, 2005), VMD (Humphrey et al., J Mol Graph 14(1):33-8, 27-8, 1996)) to generate variant specific scaffolds for simulated small molecule docking (AutoDock Vina (Trott and Olson, J Comput Chem 31(2):455-61, 2010)).
SNP2SIM is composed of three independent modules that can be used sequentially to generate the variant scaffolds of missense protein variants from the wildtype protein structure. The workflow first generates the mutant structure and configuration files required to execute molecular dynamics simulations of solvated protein variant structures. The resulting trajectories are clustered based on the structural diversity of residues involved in ligand binding to produce one or more variant scaffolds of the protein structure. Finally, these unique structural conformations are bound to small molecule ligand libraries to predict variant induced changes to drug binding relative to the wildtype protein structure.
SNP2SIM provides a platform to apply molecular simulation based functional analysis of sequence variation in the protein targets of small molecule therapies. In addition to simplifying the simulation of variant specific drug interactions, the workflow enables large scale computational mutagenesis by controlling the parameterization of molecular simulations across multiple users or distributed computing infrastructures. This enables the parallelization of the computationally intensive molecular simulations to be aggregated for downstream functional analysis, and facilitates comparing various simulation options, such as the specific residues used to define structural variant clusters. The Python scripts that implement the SNP2SIM workflow are available (SNP2SIM Repository. https://github.com/mccoymd/SNP2SIM, Accessed 2019 February ), and individual SNP2SIM modules are available as apps on the Seven Bridges Cancer Genomics Cloud (Lau et al., Cancer Res 77(21):e3-e6, 2017; Cancer Genomics Cloud [www.cancergenomicscloud.org; Accessed 2018 November]).

Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is a commonly used technology for studying the genetic basis of biological processes and it underpins the aspirations of precision medicine. However, there are significant challenges when dealing with NGS data. Firstly, a huge number of bioinformatics tools for a wide range of uses exist, therefore it is challenging to design an analysis pipeline. Secondly, NGS analysis is computationally intensive, requiring expensive infrastructure, and many medical and research centres do not have adequate high performance computing facilities and cloud computing is not always an option due to privacy and ownership issues. Finally, the interpretation of the results is not trivial and most available pipelines lack the utilities to favour this crucial step.
We have therefore developed a fast and efficient bioinformatics pipeline that allows for the analysis of DNA sequencing data, while requiring little computational effort and memory usage. DNAscan can analyse a whole exome sequencing sample in 1 h and a 40x whole genome sequencing sample in 13 h, on a midrange computer. The pipeline can look for single nucleotide variants, small indels, structural variants, repeat expansions and viral genetic material (or any other organism). Its results are annotated using a customisable variety of databases and are available for an on-the-fly visualisation with a local deployment of the gene.iobio platform. DNAscan is implemented in Python. Its code and documentation are available on GitHub: https://github.com/KHP-Informatics/DNAscan. Instructions for an easy and fast deployment with Docker and Singularity are also provided on GitHub.
DNAscan is an extremely fast and computationally efficient pipeline for analysis, visualization and interpretation of NGS data. It is designed to provide a powerful and easy-to-use tool for applications in biomedical research and diagnostic medicine, at minimal computational cost. Its comprehensive approach will maximise the potential audience of users, bringing such analyses within the reach of non-specialist laboratories, and those from centres with limited funding available.

We present Interactome INSIDER, a tool to link genomic variant information with structural protein–protein interactomes. Underlying this tool is the application of machine learning to predict protein interaction interfaces for 185,957 protein interactions with previously unresolved interfaces in human and seven model organisms, including the entire experimentally determined human binary interactome. Predicted interfaces exhibit functional properties similar to those of known interfaces, including enrichment for disease mutations and recurrent cancer mutations. Through 2,164 de novo mutagenesis experiments, we show that mutations of predicted and known interface residues disrupt interactions at a similar rate and much more frequently than mutations outside of predicted interfaces. To spur functional genomic studies, Interactome INSIDER (http://interactomeinsider.yulab.org) enables users to identify whether variants or disease mutations are enriched in known and predicted interaction interfaces at various resolutions. Users may explore known population variants, disease mutations, and somatic cancer mutations, or they may upload their own set of mutations for this purpose.

Understanding the functional effect of Single Amino acid Substitutions (SAS), derived from the occurrence of single nucleotide variants (SNVs), and their relation to disease development is a major issue in clinical genomics. Despite the existence of several bioinformatic algorithms and servers that predict if a SAS is pathogenic or not, they give little or no information at all on the reasons for pathogenicity prediction and on the actual predicted effect of the SAS on the protein function. Moreover, few actual methods take into account structural information when available for automated analysis. Moreover, many of these algorithms are able to predict an effect that no necessarily translates directly into pathogenicity. VarQ is a bioinformatic pipeline that incorporates structural information for the detailed analysis and prediction of SAS effect on protein function. It is an online tool which uses UniProt id and automatically analyzes known and user provided SAS for their effect on protein activity, folding, aggregation and protein interactions, among others. We show that structural information, when available, can improve the SAS pathogenicity diagnosis and more important explain its causes. We show that VarQ is able to correctly reproduce previous analysis of RASopathies related mutations, saving extensive and time consuming manual curation. VarQ assessment was performed over a set of previously manually curated RASopathies (diseases that affects the RAS/MAPK signaling pathway) related variants, showing its ability to correctly predict the phenotypic outcome and its underlying cause. This resource is available online at http://varq.qb.fcen.uba.ar/. Supporting Information & Tutorials may be found in the webpage of the tool.

The TKSAMC is a web server which calculates protein charge–charge interactions via the Tanford–Kirkwood Surface Accessibility model with the Monte Carlo method for sampling different protein protonation states. The optimization of charge–charge interactions via directed mutations has successfully enhanced the thermal stability of different proteins and could be a key to protein engineering improvement. The server presents the electrostatic free energy contribution of each polar-charged residue to the protein native state stability. Specific residues are suggested to be mutated for improving thermal stability. The choice of a residue is based on its fraction of side chain exposed to solvent and its positive free energy contribution, which tends to destabilize the protein native state. Any residue energy contribution can be shown as a function of pH condition. The web server is freely available at UNESP (São Paulo State University - DF/IBILCE): http://tksamc.df.ibilce.unesp.br and also on GitHub https://github.com/contessoto/tksamc.

Drug resistance is one of the most intractable issues for successful treatment in current clinical practice. Although many mutations contributing to drug resistance have been identified, the relationship between the mutations and the related pharmacological profile of drug candidates has yet to be fully elucidated, which is valuable both for the molecular dissection of drug resistance mechanisms and for suggestion of promising treatment strategies to counter resistant. Hence, effective prediction approach for estimating the sensitivity of mutations to agents is a new opportunity that counters drug resistance and creates a high interest in pharmaceutical research. However, this task is always hampered by limited known resistance training samples and accurately estimation of binding affinity. Upon this challenge, we successfully developed Auto In Silico Macromolecular Mutation Scanning (AIMMS), a web server for computer-aided de novo drug resistance prediction for any ligand–protein systems. AIMMS can qualitatively estimate the free energy consequences of any mutations through a fast mutagenesis scanning calculation based on a single molecular dynamics trajectory, which is differentiated with other web services by a statistical learning system. AIMMS suite is available at http://chemyang.ccnu.edu.cn/ccb/server/AIMMS/.

MolArt fills the gap between sequence and structure visualization by providing a light-weight, interactive environment enabling exploration of sequence annotations in the context of available experimental or predicted protein structures. Provided a UniProt ID, MolArt downloads and displays sequence annotations, sequence-structure mapping and relevant structures. The sequence and structure views are interlinked, enabling sequence annotations being color overlaid over the mapped structures, thus providing an enhanced understanding and interpretation of the available molecular data.
MolArt is released under the Apache 2 license and is available at https://github.com/davidhoksza/MolArt. The project web page https://davidhoksza.github.io/MolArt/ features examples and applications of the tool.

Molecular recognition features (MoRFs) are short binding regions located within longer intrinsically disordered regions that bind to protein partners via disorder-to-order transitions. MoRFs are implicated in important processes including signaling and regulation. However, only a limited number of experimentally validated MoRFs is known, which motivates development of computational methods that predict MoRFs from protein chains.
We introduce a new MoRF predictor, MoRFpred, which identifies all MoRF types (α, β, coil and complex). We develop a comprehensive dataset of annotated MoRFs to build and empirically compare our method. MoRFpred utilizes a novel design in which annotations generated by sequence alignment are fused with predictions generated by a Support Vector Machine (SVM), which uses a custom designed set of sequence-derived features. The features provide information about evolutionary profiles, selected physiochemical properties of amino acids, and predicted disorder, solvent accessibility and B-factors. Empirical evaluation on several datasets shows that MoRFpred outperforms related methods: α-MoRF-Pred that predicts α-MoRFs and ANCHOR which finds disordered regions that become ordered when bound to a globular partner. We show that our predicted (new) MoRF regions have non-random sequence similarity with native MoRFs. We use this observation along with the fact that predictions with higher probability are more accurate to identify putative MoRF regions. We also identify a few sequence-derived hallmarks of MoRFs. They are characterized by dips in the disorder predictions and higher hydrophobicity and stability when compared to adjacent (in the chain) residues.
http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/MoRFpred/; http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/MoRFpred/Supplement.pdf

Several major screenings of genetic profiling and drug testing in cancer cell lines proved that the integration of genomic portraits and compound activities is effective in discovering new genetic markers of drug sensitivity and clinically relevant anticancer compounds. Despite most genetic and drug response data are publicly available, the availability of user-friendly tools for their integrative analysis remains limited, thus hampering an effective exploitation of this information. Here, we present GDA, a web-based tool for Genomics and Drugs integrated Analysis that combines drug response data for >50 800 compounds with mutations and gene expression profiles across 73 cancer cell lines. Genomic and pharmacological data are integrated through a modular architecture that allows users to identify compounds active towards cancer cell lines bearing a specific genomic background and, conversely, the mutational or transcriptional status of cells responding or not-responding to a specific compound. Results are presented through intuitive graphical representations and supplemented with information obtained from public repositories. As both personalized targeted therapies and drug-repurposing are gaining increasing attention, GDA represents a resource to formulate hypotheses on the interplay between genomic traits and drug response in cancer. GDA is freely available at http://gda.unimore.it/.

Broader functional annotation of genetic variation is a valuable means for prioritising phenotypically-important variants in further disease studies and large-scale genotyping projects. We developed SNPnexus to meet this need by assessing the potential significance of known and novel SNPs on the major transcriptome, proteome, regulatory and structural variation models. Since its previous release in 2012, we have made significant improvements to the annotation categories and updated the query and data viewing systems. The most notable changes include broader functional annotation of noncoding variants and expanding annotations to the most recent human genome assembly GRCh38/hg38. SNPnexus has now integrated rich resources from ENCODE and Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium to map and annotate the noncoding variants onto different classes of regulatory regions and noncoding RNAs as well as providing their predicted functional impact from eight popular non-coding variant scoring algorithms and computational methods. A novel functionality offered now is the support for neo-epitope predictions from leading tools to facilitate its use in immunotherapeutic applications. These updates to SNPnexus are in preparation for its future expansion towards a fully comprehensive computational workflow for disease-associated variant prioritization from sequencing data, placing its users at the forefront of translational research. SNPnexus is freely available at http://www.snp-nexus.org.

Amyloid is an insoluble fibrous protein and its mis-aggregation can lead to some diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease and Creutzfeldt–Jakob’s disease. Therefore, the identification of amyloid is essential for the discovery and understanding of disease. We established a novel predictor called RFAmy based on random forest to identify amyloid, and it employed SVMProt 188-D feature extraction method based on protein composition and physicochemical properties and pse-in-one feature extraction method based on amino acid composition, autocorrelation pseudo acid composition, profile-based features and predicted structures features. In the ten-fold cross-validation test, RFAmy’s overall accuracy was 89.19% and F-measure was 0.891. Results were obtained by comparison experiments with other feature, classifiers, and existing methods. This shows the effectiveness of RFAmy in predicting amyloid protein. The RFAmy proposed in this paper can be accessed through the URL http://server.malab.cn/RFAmyloid/.

The 1000 Genomes (1KG) Project provides a near-comprehensive resource on human genetic variation in worldwide reference populations. 1KG variants can be accessed through a browser and through the raw and annotated data that are regularly released on an ftp server. We developed Ferret, a user-friendly Java tool, to easily extract genetic variation information from these large and complex data files. From a locus, gene(s) or SNP(s) of interest, Ferret retrieves genotype data for 1KG SNPs and indels, and computes allelic frequencies for 1KG populations and optionally, for the Exome Sequencing Project populations. By converting the 1KG data into files that can be imported into popular pre-existing tools (e.g. PLINK and HaploView), Ferret offers a straightforward way, even for non-bioinformatics specialists, to manipulate, explore and merge 1KG data with the user’s dataset, as well as visualize linkage disequilibrium pattern, infer haplotypes and design tagSNPs.Ferret tool and source code are publicly available at http://limousophie35.github.io/Ferret/.

With the rapidly developing high-throughput sequencing technologies known as next generation sequencing or NGS, our approach to gene hunting and diagnosis has drastically changed. In <10 years, these technologies have moved from gene panel to whole genome sequencing and from an exclusively research context to clinical practice. Today, the limit is not the sequencing of one, many or all genes but rather the data analysis. Consequently, the challenge is to rapidly and efficiently identify disease-causing mutations within millions of variants. To do so, we developed the VarAFT software to annotate and pinpoint human disease-causing mutations through access to multiple layers of information. VarAFT was designed both for research and clinical contexts and is accessible to all scientists, regardless of bioinformatics training. Data from multiple samples may be combined to address all Mendelian inheritance modes, cancers or population genetics. Optimized filtration parameters can be stored and re-applied to large datasets. In addition to classical annotations from dbNSFP, VarAFT contains unique features at the disease (OMIM), phenotypic (HPO), gene (Gene Ontology, pathways) and variation levels (predictions from UMD-Predictor and Human Splicing Finder) that can be combined to optimally select candidate pathogenic mutations. VarAFT is freely available at: http://varaft.eu.

Many diseases are associated to single nucleotide polymorphisms that affect critical regions of proteins as binding sites or post translational modifications. Therefore, analysing genomic variants with structural and molecular biology data is a powerful framework in order to elucidate the potential causes of such diseases.
A new version of our web framework 3DBIONOTES is presented. This version offers new tools to analyse and visualize protein annotations and genomic variants, including a contingency analysis of variants and amino acid features by means of a Fisher exact test, the integration of a gene annotation viewer to highlight protein features on gene sequences and a protein–protein interaction viewer to display protein annotations at network level.
The web server is available at https://3dbionotes.cnb.csic.es

Proteins are highly dynamic molecules, whose function is intrinsically linked to their molecular motions. Despite the pivotal role of protein dynamics, their computational simulation cost has led to most structure-based approaches for assessing the impact of mutations on protein structure and function relying upon static structures. Here we present DynaMut, a web server implementing two distinct, well established normal mode approaches, which can be used to analyze and visualize protein dynamics by sampling conformations and assess the impact of mutations on protein dynamics and stability resulting from vibrational entropy changes. DynaMut integrates our graph-based signatures along with normal mode dynamics to generate a consensus prediction of the impact of a mutation on protein stability. We demonstrate our approach outperforms alternative approaches to predict the effects of mutations on protein stability and flexibility (P-value < 0.001), achieving a correlation of up to 0.70 on blind tests. DynaMut also provides a comprehensive suite for protein motion and flexibility analysis and visualization via a freely available, user friendly web server at http://biosig.unimelb.edu.au/dynamut/.

Interpretation of genetic variation is needed for deciphering genotype-phenotype associations, mechanisms of inherited disease, and cancer driver mutations. Millions of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in human genomes are known and thousands are associated with disease. An estimated 21% of disease-associated amino acid substitutions corresponding to missense SNVs are located in protein sites of post-translational modifications (PTMs), chemical modifications of amino acids that extend protein function. ActiveDriverDB is a comprehensive human proteo-genomics database that annotates disease mutations and population variants through the lens of PTMs. We integrated >385,000 published PTM sites with ∼3.6 million substitutions from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), the ClinVar database of disease genes, and human genome sequencing projects. The database includes site-specific interaction networks of proteins, upstream enzymes such as kinases, and drugs targeting these enzymes. We also predicted network-rewiring impact of mutations by analyzing gains and losses of kinase-bound sequence motifs. ActiveDriverDB provides detailed visualization, filtering, browsing and searching options for studying PTM-associated mutations. Users can upload mutation datasets interactively and use our application programming interface in pipelines. Integrative analysis of mutations and PTMs may help decipher molecular mechanisms of phenotypes and disease, as exemplified by case studies of TP53, BRCA2 and VHL. The open-source database is available at https://www.ActiveDriverDB.org.

Mutual exclusivity is a widely recognized property of many cancer drivers. Knowledge about these relationships can provide important insights into cancer drivers, cancer-driving pathways and cancer subtypes. It can also be used to predict new functional interactions between cancer driving genes and uncover novel cancer drivers. Currently, most of mutual exclusivity analyses are preformed focusing on a limited set of genes in part due to the computational cost required to rigorously compute P-values.
To reduce the computing cost and perform less restricted mutual exclusivity analysis, we developed an efficient method to estimate P-values while controlling the mutation rates of individual patients and genes similar to the permutation test. A comprehensive mutual exclusivity analysis allowed us to uncover mutually exclusive pairs, some of which may have relatively low mutation rates. These pairs often included likely cancer drivers that have been missed in previous analyses. More importantly, our results demonstrated that mutual exclusivity can also provide information that goes beyond the interactions between cancer drivers and can, for example, elucidate different mutagenic processes in different cancer groups. In particular, including frequently mutated, long genes such as TTN in our analysis allowed us to observe interesting patterns of APOBEC activity in breast cancer and identify a set of related driver genes that are highly predictive of patient survival. In addition, we utilized our mutual exclusivity analysis in support of a previously proposed model where APOBEC activity is the underlying process that causes TP53 mutations in a subset of breast cancer cases.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Przytycka/index.cgi#wesme

The NewProt protein engineering portal is a one-stop-shop for in silico protein engineering. It gives access to a large number of servers that compute a wide variety of protein structure characteristics supporting work on the modification of proteins through the introduction of (multiple) point mutations. The results can be inspected through multiple visualizers. The HOPE software is included to indicate mutations with possible undesired side effects. The Hotspot Wizard software is embedded for the design of mutations that modify a proteins’ activity, specificity, or stability. The NewProt portal is freely accessible at http://newprot.cmbi.umcn.nl/ and http://newprot.fluidops.net/.

Evaluation of the possible implications of genomic variants is an increasingly important task in the current high throughput sequencing era. Structural information however is still not routinely exploited during this evaluation process. The main reasons can be attributed to the partial structural coverage of the human proteome and the lack of tools which conveniently convert genomic positions, which are the frequent output of genomic pipelines, to proteins and structure coordinates.
We present G23D, a tool for conversion of human genomic coordinates to protein coordinates and protein structures. G23D allows mapping of genomic positions/variants on evolutionary related (and not only identical) protein three dimensional (3D) structures as well as on theoretical models. By doing so it significantly extends the space of variants for which structural insight is feasible. To facilitate interpretation of the variant consequence, pathogenic variants, functional sites and polymorphism sites are displayed on protein sequence and structure diagrams alongside the input variants. G23D also provides modeling of the mutant structure, analysis of intra-protein contacts and instant access to functional predictions and predictions of thermo-stability changes. G23D is available at http://www.sheba-cancer.org.il/G23D.
G23D extends the fraction of variants for which structural analysis is applicable and provides better and faster accessibility for structural data to biologists and geneticists who routinely work with genomic information.

We present a web-server for rapid prediction of changes in protein stabilities over a range of temperatures and experimental conditions upon single- or multiple-point substitutions of charged residues. Potential mutants are identified by a charge-shuffling procedure while the stability changes (i.e. an unfolding curve) are predicted employing an ensemble-based statistical-mechanical model. We expect this server to be a simple yet detailed tool for engineering stabilities, identifying electrostatically frustrated residues, generating local stability maps and in constructing fitness landscapes.
The web-server is freely available at http://pbl.biotech.iitm.ac.in/pStab and supports recent versions of all major browsers.

Protein engineering methods are commonly employed to decipher the folding mechanism of proteins and enzymes. However, such experiments are exceedingly time and resource intensive. It would therefore be advantageous to develop a simple computational tool to predict changes in folding rates upon mutations. Such a method should be able to rapidly provide the sequence position and chemical nature to modulate through mutation, to effect a particular change in rate. This can be of importance in protein folding, function or mechanistic studies.
We have developed a robust knowledge-based methodology to predict the changes in folding rates upon mutations formulated from amino and acid properties using multiple linear regression approach. We benchmarked this method against an experimental database of 790 point mutations from 26 two-state proteins. Mutants were first classified according to secondary structure, accessible surface area and position along the primary sequence. Three prime amino acid features eliciting the best relationship with folding rates change were then shortlisted for each class along with an optimized window length. We obtained a self-consistent mean absolute error of 0.36 s−1 and a mean Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of 0.81. Jack-knife test resulted in a MAE of 0.42 s−1 and a PCC of 0.73. Moreover, our method highlights the importance of outlier(s) detection and studying their implications in the folding mechanism.
A web server ‘Folding RaCe’ has been developed and is available at http://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/proteinfolding/foldingrace.html.

Nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) are prevalent in genomes and are closely associated with inherited diseases. To facilitate identifying disease-associated nsSNPs from a large number of neutral nsSNPs, it is important to develop computational tools to predict the nsSNP's phenotypic effect (disease-associated versus neutral). nsSNPAnalyzer, a web-based software developed for this purpose, extracts structural and evolutionary information from a query nsSNP and uses a machine learning method called Random Forest to predict the nsSNP's phenotypic effect. nsSNPAnalyzer server is available at http://snpanalyzer.utmem.edu/ .

Protein variability can now be studied by measuring high-resolution tolerance-to-substitution maps and fitness landscapes in saturated mutational libraries. But these rich and expensive datasets are typically interpreted coarsely, restricting detailed analyses to positions of extremely high or low variability or dubbed important beforehand based on existing knowledge about active sites, interaction surfaces, (de)stabilizing mutations, etc.
Our new webserver PsychoProt (freely available without registration at http://psychoprot.epfl.ch or at http://lucianoabriata.altervista.org/psychoprot/index.html) helps to detect, quantify, and sequence/structure map the biophysical and biochemical traits that shape amino acid preferences throughout a protein as determined by deep-sequencing of saturated mutational libraries or from large alignments of naturally occurring variants.
We exemplify how PsychoProt helps to (i) unveil protein structure-function relationships from experiments and from alignments that are consistent with structures according to coevolution analysis, (ii) recall global information about structural and functional features and identify hitherto unknown constraints to variation in alignments, and (iii) point at different sources of variation among related experimental datasets or between experimental and alignment-based data. Remarkably, metabolic costs of the amino acids pose strong constraints to variability at protein surfaces in nature but not in the laboratory. This and other differences call for caution when extrapolating results from in vitro experiments to natural scenarios in, for example, studies of protein evolution.
We show through examples how PsychoProt can be a useful tool for the broad communities of structural biology and molecular evolution, particularly for studies about protein modeling, evolution and design.

Mutations in human genome are mainly through single nucleotide polymorphism, some of which can affect stability and function of proteins, causing human diseases. Several methods have been proposed to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability; but most require features from experimental structure. Given the fast progress in protein structure prediction, this work explores the possibility to improve the mutation-induced stability change prediction using low-resolution structure modeling.
We developed a new method (STRUM) for predicting stability change caused by single-point mutations. Starting from wild-type sequences, 3D models are constructed by the iterative threading assembly refinement (I-TASSER) simulations, where physics- and knowledge-based energy functions are derived on the I-TASSER models and used to train STRUM models through gradient boosting regression. STRUM was assessed by 5-fold cross validation on 3421 experimentally determined mutations from 150 proteins. The Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between predicted and measured changes of Gibbs free-energy gap, ΔΔG, upon mutation reaches 0.79 with a root-mean-square error 1.2 kcal/mol in the mutation-based cross-validations. The PCC reduces if separating training and test mutations from non-homologous proteins, which reflects inherent correlations in the current mutation sample. Nevertheless, the results significantly outperform other state-of-the-art methods, including those built on experimental protein structures. Detailed analyses show that the most sensitive features in STRUM are the physics-based energy terms on I-TASSER models and the conservation scores from multiple-threading template alignments. However, the ΔΔG prediction accuracy has only a marginal dependence on the accuracy of protein structure models as long as the global fold is correct. These data demonstrate the feasibility to use low-resolution structure modeling for high-accuracy stability change prediction upon point mutations.
http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/STRUM/

Much remains unknown about the progression and heterogeneity of mutational processes in different cancers and their diagnostic and clinical potential. A growing body of evidence supports mutation rate dependence on the local DNA sequence context for various types of mutations. We propose several tools for the analysis of cancer context-dependent mutations, which are implemented in an online computational framework MutaGene. The framework explores DNA context-dependent mutational patterns and underlying somatic cancer mutagenesis, analyzes mutational profiles of cancer samples, identifies the combinations of underlying mutagenic processes including those related to infidelity of DNA replication and repair machinery, and various other endogenous and exogenous mutagenic factors. As a result, the combination of mutagenic processes can be identified in any query sample with subsequent comparison to mutational profiles derived from malignant and benign samples. In addition, mutagen or cancer-specific mutational background models are applied to calculate expected DNA and protein site mutability to decouple relative contributions of mutagenesis and selection in carcinogenesis, thus elucidating the site-specific driving events in cancer. MutaGene is freely available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/mutagene/.

The MutationAligner web resource, available at http://www.mutationaligner.org, enables discovery and exploration of somatic mutation hotspots identified in protein domains in currently (mid-2015) more than 5000 cancer patient samples across 22 different tumor types. Using multiple sequence alignments of protein domains in the human genome, we extend the principle of recurrence analysis by aggregating mutations in homologous positions across sets of paralogous genes. Protein domain analysis enhances the statistical power to detect cancer-relevant mutations and links mutations to the specific biological functions encoded in domains. We illustrate how the MutationAligner database and interactive web tool can be used to explore, visualize and analyze mutation hotspots in protein domains across genes and tumor types. We believe that MutationAligner will be an important resource for the cancer research community by providing detailed clues for the functional importance of particular mutations, as well as for the design of functional genomics experiments and for decision support in precision medicine. MutationAligner is slated to be periodically updated to incorporate additional analyses and new data from cancer genomics projects.

The ability to predict how a mutation affects ligand binding is an essential step in understanding, anticipating and improving the design of new treatments for drug resistance and in understanding genetic diseases. Here we present mCSM-lig, a structure-guided computational approach for quantifying the effects of single-point missense mutations on affinities of small molecules for proteins. mCSM-lig uses graph-based signatures to represent the wild-type environment of mutations and small-molecule chemical features and changes in protein stability as evidence to train a predictive model using a representative set of protein-ligand complexes from the Platinum database. We show our method provides a very good correlation with experimental data (up to ρ = 0.67) and is effective in predicting a range of chemotherapeutic, antiviral and antibiotic resistance mutations, providing useful insights for genotypic screening and to guide drug development. mCSM-lig also provides insights into understanding Mendelian disease mutations and as a tool for guiding protein design. mCSM-lig is freely available as a web server at http://structure.bioc.cam.ac.uk/mcsm_lig.

Here, we present an updated version of CancerResource, freely available without registration at http://bioinformatics.charite.de/care. With upcoming information on target expression and mutations in patients’ tumors, the need for systems supporting decisions on individual therapy is growing. This knowledge is based on numerous, experimentally validated drug-target interactions and supporting analyses such as measuring changes in gene expression using microarrays and HTS-efforts on cell lines. To enable a better overview about similar drug-target data and supporting information, a series of novel information connections are established and made available as described in the following. CancerResource contains about 91 000 drug-target relations, more than 2000 cancer cell lines and drug sensitivity data for about 50 000 drugs. CancerResource enables the capability of uploading external expression and mutation data and comparing them to the database's cell lines. Target genes and compounds are projected onto cancer-related pathways to get a better overview about how drug-target interactions benefit the treatment of cancer. Features like cellular fingerprints comprising of mutations, expression values and drug-sensitivity data can promote the understanding of genotype to drug sensitivity associations. Ultimately, these profiles can also be used to determine the most effective drug treatment for a cancer cell line most similar to a patient's tumor cells.

The recent advancement of the next generation sequencing technology has enabled the fast and low-cost detection of all genetic variants spreading across the entire human genome, making the application of whole-genome sequencing a tendency in the study of disease-causing genetic variants. Nevertheless, there still lacks a repository that collects predictions of functionally damaging effects of human genetic variants, though it has been well recognized that such predictions play a central role in the analysis of whole-genome sequencing data. To fill this gap, we developed a database named dbWGFP (a database and web server of human whole-genome single nucleotide variants and their functional predictions) that contains functional predictions and annotations of nearly 8.58 billion possible human whole-genome single nucleotide variants. Specifically, this database integrates 48 functional predictions calculated by 17 popular computational methods and 44 valuable annotations obtained from various data sources. Standalone software, user-friendly query services and free downloads of this database are available at http://bioinfo.au.tsinghua.edu.cn/dbwgfp. dbWGFP provides a valuable resource for the analysis of whole-genome sequencing, exome sequencing and SNP array data, thereby complementing existing data sources and computational resources in deciphering genetic bases of human inherited diseases.

Recently, with the development of next generation sequencing (NGS), the combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and NGS, namely ChIP-seq, has become a powerful technique to capture potential genomic binding sites of regulatory factors, histone modifications and chromatin accessible regions. For most researchers, additional information including genomic variations on the TF binding site, allele frequency of variation between different populations, variation associated disease, and other neighbour TF binding sites are essential to generate a proper hypothesis or a meaningful conclusion. Many ChIP-seq datasets had been deposited on the public domain to help researchers make new discoveries. However, researches are often intimidated by the complexity of data structure and largeness of data volume. Such information would be more useful if they could be combined or downloaded with ChIP-seq data. To meet such demands, we built a webtool: ePIgenomic ANNOtation tool (ePIANNO, http://epianno.stat.sinica.edu.tw/index.html). ePIANNO is a web server that combines SNP information of populations (1000 Genomes Project) and gene-disease association information of GWAS (NHGRI) with ChIP-seq (hmChIP, ENCODE, and ROADMAP epigenomics) data. ePIANNO has a user-friendly website interface allowing researchers to explore, navigate, and extract data quickly. We use two examples to demonstrate how users could use functions of ePIANNO webserver to explore useful information about TF related genomic variants. Users could use our query functions to search target regions, transcription factors, or annotations. ePIANNO may help users to generate hypothesis or explore potential biological functions for their studies.

An important message taken from human genome sequencing projects is that the human population exhibits approximately 99.9% genetic similarity. Variations in the remaining parts of the genome determine our identity, trace our history and reveal our heritage. The precise delineation of phenotypically causal variants plays a key role in providing accurate personalized diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of inherited diseases. Several computational methods for achieving such delineation have been reported recently. However, their ability to pinpoint potentially deleterious variants is limited by the fact that their mechanisms of prediction do not account for the existence of different categories of variants. Consequently, their output is biased towards the variant categories that are most strongly represented in the variant databases. Moreover, most such methods provide numeric scores but not binary predictions of the deleteriousness of variants or confidence scores that would be more easily understood by users. We have constructed three datasets covering different types of disease-related variants, which were divided across five categories: (i) regulatory, (ii) splicing, (iii) missense, (iv) synonymous, and (v) nonsense variants. These datasets were used to develop category-optimal decision thresholds and to evaluate six tools for variant prioritization: CADD, DANN, FATHMM, FitCons, FunSeq2 and GWAVA. This evaluation revealed some important advantages of the category-based approach. The results obtained with the five best-performing tools were then combined into a consensus score. Additional comparative analyses showed that in the case of missense variations, protein-based predictors perform better than DNA sequence-based predictors. A user-friendly web interface was developed that provides easy access to the five tools’ predictions, and their consensus scores, in a user-understandable format tailored to the specific features of different categories of variations. To enable comprehensive evaluation of variants, the predictions are complemented with annotations from eight databases. The web server is freely available to the community at http://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/predictsnp2.

We present a practical computational pipeline to readily perform data analyses of protein–protein interaction networks by using genetic and functional information mapped onto protein structures. We provide a 3D representation of the available protein structure and its regions (surface, interface, core and disordered) for the selected genetic variants and/or SNPs, and a prediction of the mutants’ impact on the protein as measured by a range of methods. We have mapped in total 2587 genetic disorder-related SNPs from OMIM, 587 873 cancer-related variants from COSMIC, and 1 484 045 SNPs from dbSNP. All result data can be downloaded by the user together with an R-script to compute the enrichment of SNPs/variants in selected structural regions.
PinSnps is available as open-access service at http://fraternalilab.kcl.ac.uk/PinSnps/

Protein function depends on its structural stability. The effects of single point variations on protein stability can elucidate the molecular mechanisms of human diseases and help in developing new drugs. Recently, we introduced INPS, a method suited to predict the effect of variations on protein stability from protein sequence and whose performance is competitive with the available state-of-the-art tools.
In this article, we describe INPS-MD (Impact of Non synonymous variations on Protein Stability-Multi-Dimension), a web server for the prediction of protein stability changes upon single point variation from protein sequence and/or structure. Here, we complement INPS with a new predictor (INPS3D) that exploits features derived from protein 3D structure. INPS3D scores with Pearson’s correlation to experimental ΔΔG values of 0.58 in cross validation and of 0.72 on a blind test set. The sequence-based INPS scores slightly lower than the structure-based INPS3D and both on the same blind test sets well compare with the state-of-the-art methods.
INPS and INPS3D are available at the same web server: http://inpsmd.biocomp.unibo.it.

The growing amount of regulatory data from the ENCODE, Roadmap Epigenomics and other consortia provides a wealth of opportunities to investigate the functional impact of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Yet, given the large number of regulatory datasets, researchers are posed with a challenge of how to efficiently utilize them to interpret the functional impact of SNP sets.
We developed the GenomeRunner web server to automate systematic statistical analysis of SNP sets within a regulatory context. Besides defining the functional impact of SNP sets, GenomeRunner implements novel regulatory similarity/differential analyses, and cell type-specific regulatory enrichment analysis. Validated against literature- and disease ontology-based approaches, analysis of 39 disease/trait-associated SNP sets demonstrated that the functional impact of SNP sets corresponds to known disease relationships. We identified a group of autoimmune diseases with SNPs distinctly enriched in the enhancers of T helper cell subpopulations, and demonstrated relevant cell type-specificity of the functional impact of other SNP sets. In summary, we show how systematic analysis of genomic data within a regulatory context can help interpreting the functional impact of SNP sets.
GenomeRunner web server is freely available at http://www.integrativegenomics.org/.

HotSpot Wizard 2.0 is a web server for automated identification of hot spots and design of smart libraries for engineering proteins’ stability, catalytic activity, substrate specificity and enantioselectivity. The server integrates sequence, structural and evolutionary information obtained from 3 databases and 20 computational tools. Users are guided through the processes of selecting hot spots using four different protein engineering strategies and optimizing the resulting library's size by narrowing down a set of substitutions at individual randomized positions. The only required input is a query protein structure. The results of the calculations are mapped onto the protein's structure and visualized with a JSmol applet. HotSpot Wizard lists annotated residues suitable for mutagenesis and can automatically design appropriate codons for each implemented strategy. Overall, HotSpot Wizard provides comprehensive annotations of protein structures and assists protein engineers with the rational design of site-specific mutations and focused libraries. It is freely available at http://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/hotspotwizard.

The next generation sequencing technologies produce unprecedented amounts of data on the genetic sequence of individual organisms. These sequences carry a substantial amount of variation that may or may be not related to a phenotype. Phenotypically important part of this variation often comes in form of protein-sequence altering (non-synonymous) single nucleotide variants (nsSNVs). Here we present StructMAn, a Web-based tool for annotation of human and non-human nsSNVs in the structural context. StructMAn analyzes the spatial location of the amino acid residue corresponding to nsSNVs in the three-dimensional (3D) protein structure relative to other proteins, nucleic acids and low molecular-weight ligands. We make use of all experimentally available 3D structures of query proteins, and also, unlike other tools in the field, of structures of proteins with detectable sequence identity to them. This allows us to provide a structural context for around 20% of all nsSNVs in a typical human sequencing sample, for up to 60% of nsSNVs in genes related to human diseases and for around 35% of nsSNVs in a typical bacterial sample. Each nsSNV can be visualized and inspected by the user in the corresponding 3D structure of a protein or protein complex. The StructMAn server is available at http://structman.mpi-inf.mpg.de.

Proteins engage in highly selective interactions with their macromolecular partners. Sequence variants that alter protein binding affinity may cause significant perturbations or complete abolishment of function, potentially leading to diseases. There exists a persistent need to develop a mechanistic understanding of impacts of variants on proteins. To address this need we introduce a new computational method MutaBind to evaluate the effects of sequence variants and disease mutations on protein interactions and calculate the quantitative changes in binding affinity. The MutaBind method uses molecular mechanics force fields, statistical potentials and fast side-chain optimization algorithms. The MutaBind server maps mutations on a structural protein complex, calculates the associated changes in binding affinity, determines the deleterious effect of a mutation, estimates the confidence of this prediction and produces a mutant structural model for download. MutaBind can be applied to a large number of problems, including determination of potential driver mutations in cancer and other diseases, elucidation of the effects of sequence variants on protein fitness in evolution and protein design. MutaBind is available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/mutabind/.

Systematic interrogation of mutation or protein modification data is important to identify sites with functional consequences and to deduce global consequences from large data sets. Mechismo (mechismo.russellab.org) enables simultaneous consideration of thousands of 3D structures and biomolecular interactions to predict rapidly mechanistic consequences for mutations and modifications. As useful functional information often only comes from homologous proteins, we benchmarked the accuracy of predictions as a function of protein/structure sequence similarity, which permits the use of relatively weak sequence similarities with an appropriate confidence measure. For protein–protein, protein–nucleic acid and a subset of protein–chemical interactions, we also developed and benchmarked a measure of whether modifications are likely to enhance or diminish the interactions, which can assist the detection of modifications with specific effects. Analysis of high-throughput sequencing data shows that the approach can identify interesting differences between cancers, and application to proteomics data finds potential mechanistic insights for how post-translational modifications can alter biomolecular interactions.

The failure of multi-step experimental procedures to yield diffraction-quality crystals is a major bottleneck in protein structure determination. Accordingly, several bioinformatics methods have been successfully developed and employed to select crystallizable proteins. Unfortunately, the majority of existing in silico methods only allow the prediction of crystallization propensity, seldom enabling computational design of protein mutants that can be targeted for enhancing protein crystallizability. Here, we present Crysalis, an integrated crystallization analysis tool that builds on support-vector regression (SVR) models to facilitate computational protein crystallization prediction, analysis, and design. More specifically, the functionality of this new tool includes: (1) rapid selection of target crystallizable proteins at the proteome level, (2) identification of site non-optimality for protein crystallization and systematic analysis of all potential single-point mutations that might enhance protein crystallization propensity, and (3) annotation of target protein based on predicted structural properties. We applied the design mode of Crysalis to identify site non-optimality for protein crystallization on a proteome-scale, focusing on proteins currently classified as non-crystallizable. Our results revealed that site non-optimality is based on biases related to residues, predicted structures, physicochemical properties, and sequence loci, which provides in-depth understanding of the features influencing protein crystallization. Crysalis is freely available at http://nmrcen.xmu.edu.cn/crysalis/.

Synonymous mutations (SMs), which changed the sequence of a gene without directly altering the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein, were thought to have no functional consequences for a long time. They are often assumed to be neutral in models of mutation and selection and were completely ignored in many studies. However, accumulating experimental evidence has demonstrated that these mutations exert their impact on gene functions via splicing accuracy, mRNA stability, translation fidelity, protein folding and expression, and some of these mutations are implicated in human diseases. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no database specially focusing on disease-related SMs.
We have developed a new database called dbDSM (database of Deleterious Synonymous Mutation), a continually updated database that collects, curates and manages available human disease-related SM data obtained from published literature. In the current release, dbDSM collects 1936 SM-disease association entries, including 1289 SMs and 443 human diseases from ClinVar, GRASP, GWAS Catalog, GWASdb, PolymiRTS database, PubMed database and Web of Knowledge. Additionally, we provided users a link to download all the data in the dbDSM and a link to submit novel data into the database. We hope dbDSM will be a useful resource for investigating the roles of SMs in human disease.
dbDSM is freely available online at http://bioinfo.ahu.edu.cn:8080/dbDSM/index.jsp with all major browser supported.

Factor XI (FXI) is the zymogen of a serine protease enzyme in the intrinsic pathway of blood coagulation and is an important factor in the creation of a stable fibrin clot. Deficiency of FXI leads to an injury-related bleeding disorder and is remarkable for the lack of correlation between bleeding symptoms and FXI coagulant activity (FXI:C). The FXI protein is composed of five domains: four tandem repeat domains of ∼80 residues known as Apple (Ap) domains, and the catalytic serine protease (Sp) domain. A total of 65 mutations throughout the FXI gene (F11) have been reported in FXI deficient patients. An interactive web database of these mutations has been created (www.FactorXI.org) that integrates the phenotypic data with genetic data and structural homology models for the five FXI domains. The database provides a central repository for all reported genetic alterations within F11. With the use of recently developed visualization tools, each mutation can be highlighted on the structural models of the FXI domains together with an appropriate survey of patient data, such as FXI:C levels and FXI antigen levels. The database also enables new F11 mutations to be interpreted. The interactive design of this database will lead to a more comprehensive comparative understanding of the genetic factors that influence bleeding risk. Hum Mutat 26(3), 192–198, 2005. © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

The prediction of change in stability upon point mutations in proteins has many applications in protein analysis and engineering. We recently adjoined a new structure-based method called MAESTRO, which is distributed as command line program. We now provide access to the most important features of MAESTRO by an easy to use web service. MAESTROweb allows the prediction of change in stability for user-defined mutations, provides a scan functionality for the most (de)stabilizing n-point mutations for a maximum of n = 5, creates mutation sensitivity profiles and evaluates potential disulfide bonds. MAESTROweb operates on monomers, multimers and biological assemblies as defined by PDB.
MAESTROweb is freely available for non-commercial use at https://biwww.che.sbg.ac.at/maestro/web.

Specific selection pressures often lead to specifically mutated genomes. The open source software SeqFeatR has been developed to identify associations between mutation patterns in biological sequences and specific selection pressures (“features”). For instance, SeqFeatR has been used to discover in viral protein sequences new T cell epitopes for hosts of given HLA types. SeqFeatR supports frequentist and Bayesian methods for the discovery of statistical sequence-feature associations. Moreover, it offers novel ways to visualize results of the statistical analyses and to relate them to further properties. In this article we demonstrate various functions of SeqFeatR with real data. The most frequently used set of functions is also provided by a web server. SeqFeatR is implemented as R package and freely available from the R archive CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/SeqFeatR/index.html). The package includes a tutorial vignette. The software is distributed under the GNU General Public License (version 3 or later). The web server URL is https://seqfeatr.zmb.uni-due.de.

ELASPIC is a novel ensemble machine-learning approach that predicts the effects of mutations on protein folding and protein–protein interactions. Here, we present the ELASPIC webserver, which makes the ELASPIC pipeline available through a fast and intuitive interface. The webserver can be used to evaluate the effect of mutations on any protein in the Uniprot database, and allows all predicted results, including modeled wild-type and mutated structures, to be managed and viewed online and downloaded if needed. It is backed by a database which contains improved structural domain definitions, and a list of curated domain–domain interactions for all known proteins, as well as homology models of domains and domain–domain interactions for the human proteome. Homology models for proteins of other organisms are calculated on the fly, and mutations are evaluated within minutes once the homology model is available.
The ELASPIC webserver is available online at http://elaspic.kimlab.org.

Protein engineering and characterisation of non-synonymous single nucleotide variants (SNVs) require accurate prediction of protein stability changes (ΔΔGu) induced by single amino acid substitutions. Here, we have developed a new prediction method called Evolutionary, Amino acid, and Structural Encodings with Multiple Models (EASE-MM), which comprises five specialised support vector machine (SVM) models and makes the final prediction from a consensus of two models selected based on the predicted secondary structure and accessible surface area of the mutated residue. The new method is applicable to single-domain monomeric proteins and can predict ΔΔGu with a protein sequence and mutation as the only inputs. EASE-MM yielded a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.53–0.59 in 10-fold cross-validation and independent testing and was able to outperform other sequence-based methods. When compared to structure-based energy functions, EASE-MM achieved a comparable or better performance. The application to a large dataset of human germline non-synonymous SNVs showed that the disease-causing variants tend to be associated with larger magnitudes of ΔΔGu predicted with EASE-MM. The EASE-MM web-server is available at http://sparks-lab.org/server/ease.

A new algorithm and Web server, mutation3D (http://mutation3d.org), proposes driver genes in cancer by identifying clusters of amino acid substitutions within tertiary protein structures. We demonstrate the feasibility of using a 3D clustering approach to implicate proteins in cancer based on explorations of single proteins using the mutation3D Web interface. On a large scale, we show that clustering with mutation3D is able to separate functional from nonfunctional mutations by analyzing a combination of 8,869 known inherited disease mutations and 2,004 SNPs overlaid together upon the same sets of crystal structures and homology models. Further, we present a systematic analysis of whole-genome and whole-exome cancer datasets to demonstrate that mutation3D identifies many known cancer genes as well as previously underexplored target genes. The mutation3D Web interface allows users to analyze their own mutation data in a variety of popular formats and provides seamless access to explore mutation clusters derived from over 975,000 somatic mutations reported by 6,811 cancer sequencing studies. The mutation3D Web interface is freely available with all major browsers supported.

The elucidation of the complex relationships linking genotypic and phenotypic variations to protein structure is a major challenge in the post-genomic era. We present MSV3d (Database of human MisSense Variants mapped to 3D protein structure), a new database that contains detailed annotation of missense variants of all human proteins (20 199 proteins). The multi-level characterization includes details of the physico-chemical changes induced by amino acid modification, as well as information related to the conservation of the mutated residue and its position relative to functional features in the available or predicted 3D model. Major releases of the database are automatically generated and updated regularly in line with the dbSNP (database of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism) and SwissVar releases, by exploiting the extensive Décrypthon computational grid resources. The database (http://decrypthon.igbmc.fr/msv3d) is easily accessible through a simple web interface coupled to a powerful query engine and a standard web service. The content is completely or partially downloadable in XML or flat file formats.

We present Virtual Pharmacist, a web-based platform that takes common types of high-throughput data, namely microarray SNP genotyping data, FASTQ and Variant Call Format (VCF) files as inputs, and reports potential drug responses in terms of efficacy, dosage and toxicity at one glance. Batch submission facilitates multivariate analysis or data mining of targeted groups. Individual analysis consists of a report that is readily comprehensible to patients and practioners who have basic knowledge in pharmacology, a table that summarizes variants and potential affected drug response according to the US Food and Drug Administration pharmacogenomic biomarker labeled drug list and PharmGKB, and visualization of a gene-drug-target network. Group analysis provides the distribution of the variants and potential affected drug response of a target group, a sample-gene variant count table, and a sample-drug count table. Our analysis of genomes from the 1000 Genome Project underlines the potentially differential drug responses among different human populations. Even within the same population, the findings from Watson’s genome highlight the importance of personalized medicine. Virtual Pharmacist can be accessed freely at http://www.sustc-genome.org.cn/vp or installed as a local web server. The codes and documentation are available at the GitHub repository (https://github.com/VirtualPharmacist/vp). Administrators can download the source codes to customize access settings for further development.

The sheer volume of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms that have been generated in recent years from projects such as the Human Genome Project, the HapMap Project and Genome-Wide Association Studies means that it is not possible to characterize all mutations experimentally on the gene products, i.e. elucidate the effects of mutations on protein structure and function. However, automatic methods that can predict the effects of mutations will allow a reduced set of mutations to be studied. Site Directed Mutator (SDM) is a statistical potential energy function that uses environment-specific amino-acid substitution frequencies within homologous protein families to calculate a stability score, which is analogous to the free energy difference between the wild-type and mutant protein. Here, we present a web server for SDM ( http://www-cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~sdm/sdm.php ), which has obtained more than 10 000 submissions since being online in April 2008. To run SDM, users must upload a wild-type structure and the position and amino acid type of the mutation. The results returned include information about the local structural environment of the wild-type and mutant residues, a stability score prediction and prediction of disease association. Additionally, the wild-type and mutant structures are displayed in a Jmol applet with the relevant residues highlighted.

Here, we report a webserver for the improved SDM, used for predicting the effects of mutations on protein stability. As a pioneering knowledge-based approach, SDM has been highlighted as the most appropriate method to use in combination with many other approaches. We have updated the environment-specific amino-acid substitution tables based on the current expanded PDB (a 5-fold increase in information), and introduced new residue-conformation and interaction parameters, including packing density and residue depth. The updated server has been extensively tested using a benchmark containing 2690 point mutations from 132 different protein structures. The revised method correlates well against the hypothetical reverse mutations, better than comparable methods built using machine-learning approaches, highlighting the strength of our knowledge-based approach for identifying stabilising mutations. Given a PDB file (a Protein Data Bank file format containing the 3D coordinates of the protein atoms), and a point mutation, the server calculates the stability difference score between the wildtype and mutant protein. The server is available at http://structure.bioc.cam.ac.uk/sdm2

Mutations play fundamental roles in evolution by introducing diversity into genomes. Missense mutations in structural genes may become either selectively advantageous or disadvantageous to the organism by affecting protein stability and/or interfering with interactions between partners. Thus, the ability to predict the impact of mutations on protein stability and interactions is of significant value, particularly in understanding the effects of Mendelian and somatic mutations on the progression of disease. Here, we propose a novel approach to the study of missense mutations, called mCSM, which relies on graph-based signatures. These encode distance patterns between atoms and are used to represent the protein residue environment and to train predictive models. To understand the roles of mutations in disease, we have evaluated their impacts not only on protein stability but also on protein–protein and protein–nucleic acid interactions.
We show that mCSM performs as well as or better than other methods that are used widely. The mCSM signatures were successfully used in different tasks demonstrating that the impact of a mutation can be correlated with the atomic-distance patterns surrounding an amino acid residue. We showed that mCSM can predict stability changes of a wide range of mutations occurring in the tumour suppressor protein p53, demonstrating the applicability of the proposed method in a challenging disease scenario.
A web server is available at http://structure.bioc.cam.ac.uk/mcsm.

Rapid advances of next-generation sequencing technology have led to the integration of genetic information with clinical care. Genetic basis of diseases and response to drugs provide new ways of disease diagnosis and safer drug usage. This integration reveals the urgent need for effective and accurate tools to analyze genetic variants. Due to the number and diversity of sources for annotation, automating variant analysis is a challenging task. Here, we present database.bio, a web application that combines variant annotation, prioritization and visualization so as to support insight into the individual genetic characteristics. It enhances annotation speed by preprocessing data on a supercomputer, and reduces database space via a unified database representation with compressed fields.
Freely available at https://database.bio

Assessment of genetic toxicity and/or carcinogenic activity is an essential element of chemical screening programs employed to protect human health. Dose–response and gene mutation data are frequently analysed by industry, academia and governmental agencies for regulatory evaluations and decision making. Over the years, a number of efforts at different institutions have led to the creation and curation of databases to house genetic toxicology data, largely, with the aim of providing public access to facilitate research and regulatory assessments. This article provides a brief introduction to a new genetic toxicology portal called Mutation Analysis Informatics Tools (MutAIT) (www.mutait.org) that provides easy access to two of the largest genetic toxicology databases, the Mammalian Gene Mutation Database (MGMD) and TransgenicDB. TransgenicDB is a comprehensive collection of transgenic rodent mutation data initially compiled and collated by Health Canada. The updated MGMD contains approximately 50 000 individual mutation spectral records from the published literature. The portal not only gives access to an enormous quantity of genetic toxicology data, but also provides statistical tools for dose–response analysis and calculation of benchmark dose. Two important R packages for dose–response analysis are provided as web-distributed applications with user-friendly graphical interfaces. The ‘drsmooth’ package performs dose–response shape analysis and determines various points of departure (PoD) metrics and the ‘PROAST’ package provides algorithms for dose–response modelling. The MutAIT statistical tools, which are currently being enhanced, provide users with an efficient and comprehensive platform to conduct quantitative dose–response analyses and determine PoD values that can then be used to calculate human exposure limits or margins of exposure.

The new era of cancer genomics is providing us with extensive knowledge of mutations and other alterations in cancer. The Cancer3D database at http://www.cancer3d.org gives an open and user-friendly way to analyze cancer missense mutations in the context of structures of proteins in which they are found. The database also helps users analyze the distribution patterns of the mutations as well as their relationship to changes in drug activity through two algorithms: e-Driver and e-Drug. These algorithms use knowledge of modular structure of genes and proteins to separately study each region. This approach allows users to find novel candidate driver regions or drug biomarkers that cannot be found when similar analyses are done on the whole-gene level. The Cancer3D database provides access to the results of such analyses based on data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE). In addition, it displays mutations from over 14 700 proteins mapped to more than 24 300 structures from PDB. This helps users visualize the distribution of mutations and identify novel three-dimensional patterns in their distribution.

High-throughput genetic testing is increasingly applied in clinics. Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) data analysis however still remains a great challenge. The interpretation of pathogenicity of single variants or combinations of variants is crucial to provide accurate diagnostic information or guide therapies.
To facilitate the interpretation of variants and the selection of candidate non-synonymous polymorphisms (nsSNPs) for further clinical studies, we developed BALL-SNP. Starting from genetic variants in variant call format (VCF) files or tabular input, our tool, first, visualizes the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the respective proteins from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) and highlights mutated residues, automatically. Second, a hierarchical bottom up clustering on the nsSNPs within the 3D structure is performed to identify nsSNPs, which are close to each other. The modular and flexible implementation allows for straightforward integration of different databases for pathogenic and benign variants, but also enables the integration of pathogenicity prediction tools. The collected background information of all variants is presented below the 3D structure in an easily interpretable table format.
First, we integrated different data resources into BALL-SNP, including databases containing information on genetic variants such as ClinVar or HUMSAVAR; third party tools that predict stability or pathogenicity in silico such as I-Mutant2.0; and additional information derived from the 3D structure such as a prediction of binding pockets. We then explored the applicability of BALL-SNP on the example of patients suffering from cardiomyopathies. Here, the analysis highlighted accumulation of variations in the genes JUP, VCL, and SMYD2.
Software solutions for analyzing high-throughput genomics data are important to support diagnosis and therapy selection. Our tool BALL-SNP, which is freely available at http://www.ccb.uni-saarland.de/BALL-SNP, combines genetic information with an easily interpretable and interactive, graphical representation of amino acid changes in proteins. Thereby relevant information from databases and computational tools is presented. Beyond this, proximity to functional sites or accumulations of mutations with a potential collective effect can be discovered.

Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) are the most common DNA sequence variation associated with disease in humans. Thus determining the clinical significance of each nsSNP is of great importance. Potential detrimental nsSNPs may be identified by genetic association studies or by functional analysis in the laboratory, both of which are expensive and time consuming. Existing computational methods lack accuracy and features to facilitate nsSNP classification for clinical use. We developed the GESPA (GEnomic Single nucleotide Polymorphism Analyzer) program to predict the pathogenicity and disease phenotype of nsSNPs.
GESPA is a user-friendly software package for classifying disease association of nsSNPs. It allows flexibility in acceptable input formats and predicts the pathogenicity of a given nsSNP by assessing the conservation of amino acids in orthologs and paralogs and supplementing this information with data from medical literature. The development and testing of GESPA was performed using the humsavar, ClinVar and humvar datasets. Additionally, GESPA also predicts the disease phenotype associated with a nsSNP with high accuracy, a feature unavailable in existing software. GESPA’s overall accuracy exceeds existing computational methods for predicting nsSNP pathogenicity. The usability of GESPA is enhanced by fast SQL-based cloud storage and retrieval of data.
GESPA is a novel bioinformatics tool to determine the pathogenicity and phenotypes of nsSNPs. We anticipate that GESPA will become a useful clinical framework for predicting the disease association of nsSNPs. The program, executable jar file, source code, GPL 3.0 license, user guide, and test data with instructions are available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/gespa.

Point mutations can have a strong impact on protein stability. A change in stability may subsequently lead to dysfunction and finally cause diseases. Moreover, protein engineering approaches aim to deliberately modify protein properties, where stability is a major constraint. In order to support basic research and protein design tasks, several computational tools for predicting the change in stability upon mutations have been developed. Comparative studies have shown the usefulness but also limitations of such programs.
We aim to contribute a novel method for predicting changes in stability upon point mutation in proteins called MAESTRO. MAESTRO is structure based and distinguishes itself from similar approaches in the following points: (i) MAESTRO implements a multi-agent machine learning system. (ii) It also provides predicted free energy change (Δ ΔG) values and a corresponding prediction confidence estimation. (iii) It provides high throughput scanning for multi-point mutations where sites and types of mutation can be comprehensively controlled. (iv) Finally, the software provides a specific mode for the prediction of stabilizing disulfide bonds. The predictive power of MAESTRO for single point mutations and stabilizing disulfide bonds is comparable to similar methods.
MAESTRO is a versatile tool in the field of stability change prediction upon point mutations. Executables for the Linux and Windows operating systems are freely available to non-commercial users from http://biwww.che.sbg.ac.at/MAESTRO.

DNA sequence variation is the underlying basis of common human traits and rarer single-gene disorders. Understanding the variome, the variants in an individual's genome, is essential to enable the ultimate goals of personalized medicine. This critical research field has grown dramatically in recent years, mostly due to the spread and development of genotyping technologies. Despite these activities being promoted by the Human Genome Variation Society and projects such as the Human Variome Project or the European GEN2PHEN Project, variome data-integration systems are far from being widely used in the research community workflow. Most of ongoing research is focused on improving locus-specific databases. Although the quality and manual curation of LSDBs adds true value to this domain, they are often narrow, heterogeneous, and independent systems. This hampers data harmonization and interoperability between systems, stifling the aggregation of data from LSDBs and related data sources. A new platform entitled Web Analysis of the Variome, WAVe, is introduced. It offers direct and programmatic access to multiple locus-specific databases, with the integration of genetic variation datasets and enrichment with relevant information. WAVe's agile and innovative Web interface is accessible at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/WAVe. Hum Mutat 32:1–6, 2011. © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Intrinsically disordered regions of proteins are known to have many functional roles in cell signaling and regulatory pathways. The altered expression of these proteins due to mutations is associated with various diseases. Currently, most of the available methods focus on predicting the disordered proteins or the disordered regions in a protein. On the other hand, methods developed for predicting protein disorder on mutation showed a poor performance with a maximum accuracy of 70%. Hence, in this work, we have developed a novel method to classify the disorder-related amino acid substitutions using amino acid properties, substitution matrices, and the effect of neighboring residues that showed an accuracy of 90.0% with a sensitivity and specificity of 94.9 and 80.6%, respectively, in 10-fold cross-validation. The method was evaluated with a test set of 20% data using 10 iterations, which showed an average accuracy of 88.9%. Furthermore, we systematically analyzed the features responsible for the better performance of our method and observed that neighboring residues play an important role in defining the disorder of a given residue in a protein sequence. We have developed a prediction server to identify disorder-related mutations, and it is available at http://www.iitm.ac.in/bioinfo/DIM_Pred/.

Engineering protein molecules with desired structure and biological functions has been an elusive goal. Development of industrially viable proteins with improved properties such as stability, catalytic activity and altered specificity by modifying the structure of an existing protein has widely been targeted through rational protein engineering. Although a range of factors contributing to thermal stability have been identified and widely researched, the in silico implementation of these as strategies directed towards enhancement of protein stability has not yet been explored extensively. A wide range of structural analysis tools is currently available for in silico protein engineering. However these tools concentrate on only a limited number of factors or individual protein structures, resulting in cumbersome and time-consuming analysis. The iRDP web server presented here provides a unified platform comprising of iCAPS, iStability and iMutants modules. Each module addresses different facets of effective rational engineering of proteins aiming towards enhanced stability. While iCAPS aids in selection of target protein based on factors contributing to structural stability, iStability uniquely offers in silico implementation of known thermostabilization strategies in proteins for identification and stability prediction of potential stabilizing mutation sites. iMutants aims to assess mutants based on changes in local interaction network and degree of residue conservation at the mutation sites. Each module was validated using an extensively diverse dataset. The server is freely accessible at http://irdp.ncl.res.in and has no login requirements.

To gain insight into how biopolymers fold as quickly as they do, it is useful to determine which structural elements limit the rate of RNA/protein folding.
We have created a new web server, FoldNucleus. Using this server, it is possible to calculate the folding nucleus for RNA molecules with known 3D structures—including pseudoknots, tRNAs, hairpins and ribozymes—and for protein molecules with known 3D structures, as long as they are smaller than 200 amino acid residues. Researchers can determine and understand which elements of the structure limit the folding process for various types of RNAs and protein molecules. Experimental Ф values for 21 proteins can be found and compared with those determined by our method: http://bioinfo.protres.ru/resources/phi_values.htm.
http://bioinfo.protres.ru/foldnucleus/.

Triggered by the sequencing of the human genome, personalized medicine has been one of the fastest growing research areas in the last decade. Multiple software and hardware technologies have been developed by several projects, culminating in the exponential growth of genetic data. Considering the technological developments in this field, it is now fairly easy and inexpensive to obtain genetic profiles for unique individuals, such as those performed by several genetic analysis companies. The availability of computational tools that simplify genetic data analysis and the disclosure of biomedical evidences are of utmost importance. We present Variobox, a desktop tool to annotate, analyze, and compare human genes. Variobox obtains variant annotation data from WAVe, protein metadata annotations from Protein Data Bank, and sequences are obtained from Locus Reference Genomic or RefSeq databases. To explore the data, Variobox provides an advanced sequence visualization that enables agile navigation through genetic regions. DNA sequencing data can be compared with reference sequences retrieved from LRG or RefSeq records, identifying and automatically annotating new potential variants. These features and data, ranging from patient sequences to HGVS-compliant variant descriptions, are combined in an intuitive interface to analyze genes and variants. Variobox is a Java application, available at http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/variobox.

Home  Biological and Medical Data Analysis  Conference paper
DiseaseCard: A Web-Based Tool for the Collaborative Integration of Genetic and Medical Information
José Luís Oliveira, Gaspar Dias, Ilídio Oliveira, Patrícia Rocha, Isabel Hermosilla, Javier Vicente, Inmaculada Spiteri, Fernando Martin-Sánchez & António Sousa Pereira 
Conference paper
Part of the Lecture Notes in Computer Science book series (LNCS,volume 3337)

The recent advances on genomics and proteomics research bring up a significant grow on the information that is publicly available. However, navigating through genetic and bioinformatics databases can be a too complex and unproductive task for a primary care physician. Moreover, considering the rare genetic diseases field, we verify that the knowledge about a specific disease is commonly disseminated over a small group of experts. The capture, maintenance and sharing of this knowledge over user-friendly interfaces will introduce new insights in the understanding of some rare genetic diseases. In this paper we present DiseaseCard, a web available collaborative service that aims to integrate and disseminate genetic and medical information on rare genetic diseases.

Recent releases of genome three-dimensional (3D) structures have the potential to transform our understanding of genomes. Nonetheless, the storage technology and visualization tools need to evolve to offer to the scientific community fast and convenient access to these data. We introduce simultaneously a database system to store and query 3D genomic data (3DBG), and a 3D genome browser to visualize and explore 3D genome structures (3DGB). We benchmark 3DBG against state-of-the-art systems and demonstrate that it is faster than previous solutions, and importantly gracefully scales with the size of data. We also illustrate the usefulness of our 3D genome Web browser to explore human genome structures. The 3D genome browser is available at http://3dgb.cs.mcgill.ca/.

An important computational step following genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is to assess whether disease or trait-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) enrich for particular biological annotations. SNP-based enrichment analysis needs to account for biases such as co-localization of GWAS signals to gene-dense and high linkage disequilibrium (LD) regions, and correlations of gene size, location and function. The SNPsnap Web server enables SNP-based enrichment analysis by providing matched sets of SNPs that can be used to calibrate background expectations. Specifically, SNPsnap efficiently identifies sets of randomly drawn SNPs that are matched to a set of query SNPs based on allele frequency, number of SNPs in LD, distance to nearest gene and gene density.
SNPsnap server is available at http://www.broadinstitute.org/mpg/snpsnap/.

Phyre2 is a suite of tools available on the web to predict and analyze protein structure, function and mutations. The focus of Phyre2 is to provide biologists with a simple and intuitive interface to state-of-the-art protein bioinformatics tools. Phyre2 replaces Phyre, the original version of the server for which we previously published a paper in Nature Protocols. In this updated protocol, we describe Phyre2, which uses advanced remote homology detection methods to build 3D models, predict ligand binding sites and analyze the effect of amino acid variants (e.g., nonsynonymous SNPs (nsSNPs)) for a user's protein sequence. Users are guided through results by a simple interface at a level of detail they determine. This protocol will guide users from submitting a protein sequence to interpreting the secondary and tertiary structure of their models, their domain composition and model quality. A range of additional available tools is described to find a protein structure in a genome, to submit large number of sequences at once and to automatically run weekly searches for proteins that are difficult to model. The server is available at http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/phyre2. A typical structure prediction will be returned between 30 min and 2 h after submission.

New technologies are enabling the measurement of many types of genomic and epigenomic information at scales ranging from the atomic to nuclear. Much of this new data is increasingly structural in nature, and is often difficult to coordinate with other data sets. There is a legitimate need for integrating and visualizing these disparate data sets to reveal structural relationships not apparent when looking at these data in isolation.
We have applied object-oriented technology to develop a downloadable visualization tool, Genome3D, for integrating and displaying epigenomic data within a prescribed three-dimensional physical model of the human genome. In order to integrate and visualize large volume of data, novel statistical and mathematical approaches have been developed to reduce the size of the data. To our knowledge, this is the first such tool developed that can visualize human genome in three-dimension. We describe here the major features of Genome3D and discuss our multi-scale data framework using a representative basic physical model. We then demonstrate many of the issues and benefits of multi-resolution data integration.
Genome3D is a software visualization tool that explores a wide range of structural genomic and epigenetic data. Data from various sources of differing scales can be integrated within a hierarchical framework that is easily adapted to new developments concerning the structure of the physical genome. In addition, our tool has a simple annotation mechanism to incorporate non-structural information. Genome3D is unique is its ability to manipulate large amounts of multi-resolution data from diverse sources to uncover complex and new structural relationships within the genome.

High-throughput re-sequencing, new genotyping technologies and the availability of reference genomes allow the extensive characterization of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertion/deletion events (indels) in many plant species. The rapidly increasing amount of re-sequencing and genotyping data generated by large-scale genetic diversity projects requires the development of integrated bioinformatics tools able to efficiently manage, analyze, and combine these genetic data with genome structure and external data.
In this context, we developed SNiPlay, a flexible, user-friendly and integrative web-based tool dedicated to polymorphism discovery and analysis. It integrates:
1) a pipeline, freely accessible through the internet, combining existing softwares with new tools to detect SNPs and to compute different types of statistical indices and graphical layouts for SNP data. From standard sequence alignments, genotyping data or Sanger sequencing traces given as input, SNiPlay detects SNPs and indels events and outputs submission files for the design of Illumina's SNP chips. Subsequently, it sends sequences and genotyping data into a series of modules in charge of various processes: physical mapping to a reference genome, annotation (genomic position, intron/exon location, synonymous/non-synonymous substitutions), SNP frequency determination in user-defined groups, haplotype reconstruction and network, linkage disequilibrium evaluation, and diversity analysis (Pi, Watterson's Theta, Tajima's D).
Furthermore, the pipeline allows the use of external data (such as phenotype, geographic origin, taxa, stratification) to define groups and compare statistical indices.
2) a database storing polymorphisms, genotyping data and grapevine sequences released by public and private projects. It allows the user to retrieve SNPs using various filters (such as genomic position, missing data, polymorphism type, allele frequency), to compare SNP patterns between populations, and to export genotyping data or sequences in various formats.
Our experiments on grapevine genetic projects showed that SNiPlay allows geneticists to rapidly obtain advanced results in several key research areas of plant genetic diversity. Both the management and treatment of large amounts of SNP data are rendered considerably easier for end-users through automation and integration. Current developments are taking into account new advances in high-throughput technologies.
SNiPlay is available at: http://sniplay.cirad.fr/.

The WashU Epigenome Browser (https://epigenomegateway.wustl.edu/) provides visualization, integration and analysis tools for epigenomic datasets. Since 2010, it has provided the scientific community with data from large consortia including the Roadmap Epigenomics and the ENCODE projects. Recently, we refactored the codebase, redesigned the user interface, and developed various novel features. New features include: (i) visualization using virtual reality (VR), which has implications in biology education and the study of 3D chromatin structure; (ii) expanded public data hubs, including data from the 4DN, ENCODE, Roadmap Epigenomics, TaRGET, IHEC and TCGA consortia; (iii) a more responsive user interface; (iv) a history of interactions, which enables undo and redo; (v) a feature we call Live Browsing, which allows multiple users to collaborate remotely on the same session; (vi) the ability to visualize local tracks and data hubs. Amazon Web Services also hosts the redesign at https://epigenomegateway.org/.

The ever increasing discovery of non-coding RNAs leads to unprecedented demand for the accurate modeling of RNA folding, including the predictions of two-dimensional (base pair) and three-dimensional all-atom structures and folding stabilities. Accurate modeling of RNA structure and stability has far-reaching impact on our understanding of RNA functions in human health and our ability to design RNA-based therapeutic strategies.
The Vfold server offers a web interface to predict (a) RNA two-dimensional structure from the nucleotide sequence, (b) three-dimensional structure from the two-dimensional structure and the sequence, and (c) folding thermodynamics (heat capacity melting curve) from the sequence. To predict the two-dimensional structure (base pairs), the server generates an ensemble of structures, including loop structures with the different intra-loop mismatches, and evaluates the free energies using the experimental parameters for the base stacks and the loop entropy parameters given by a coarse-grained RNA folding model (the Vfold model) for the loops. To predict the three-dimensional structure, the server assembles the motif scaffolds using structure templates extracted from the known PDB structures and refines the structure using all-atom energy minimization.
The Vfold-based web server provides a user friendly tool for the prediction of RNA structure and stability. The web server and the source codes are freely accessible for public use at “http://rna.physics.missouri.edu”.

STarMir web server predicts microRNA (miRNA) binding sites on a target ribonucleic acid (RNA). STarMir is an implementation of logistic prediction models developed with miRNA binding data from crosslinking immunoprecipitation (CLIP) studies (Liu,C., Mallick, B., Long, D., Rennie, W.A., Wolenc, A., Carmack, C.S. and Ding, Y. (2013). CLIP-based prediction of mammalian microRNA binding sites. Nucleic Acids Res., 41(14), e138). In both intra-dataset and inter-dataset validations, the models showed major improvements over established algorithms in predictions of both seed and seedless sites. General applicability of the models was indicated by good performance in cross-species validations. The input data for STarMir is processed by the web server to perform prediction of miRNA binding sites, compute comprehensive sequence, thermodynamic and target structure features and a logistic probability as a measure of confidence for each predicted site. For each of seed and seedless sites and for all three regions of a mRNA (3′ UTR, CDS and 5′ UTR), STarMir output includes the computed binding site features, the logistic probability and a publication-quality diagram of the predicted miRNA:target hybrid. The prediction results are available through both an interactive viewer and downloadable text files. As an application module of the Sfold RNA package (http://sfold.wadsworth.org), STarMir is freely available to all at http://sfold.wadsworth.org/starmir.html.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short (19-23 nucleotides) non-coding RNAs that bind to sites in the 3’untranslated regions (3’UTR) of a targeted messenger RNA (mRNA). Binding leads to degradation of the transcript or blocked translation resulting in decreased expression of the targeted gene. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been found in 3’UTRs that disrupt normal miRNA binding or introduce new binding sites and some of these have been associated with disease pathogenesis. This raises the importance of detecting miRNA targets and predicting the possible effects of SNPs on binding sites. In the last decade a number of studies have been conducted to predict the location of miRNA binding sites. However, there have been fewer algorithms published to analyze the effects of SNPs on miRNA binding. Moreover, the existing software has some shortcomings including the requirement for significant manual labor when working with huge lists of SNPs and that algorithms work only for SNPs present in databases such as dbSNP. These limitations become problematic as next-generation sequencing is leading to large numbers of novel variants in 3’UTRs.
In order to overcome these issues, we developed a web-server named mrSNP which predicts the impact of a SNP in a 3’UTR on miRNA binding. The proposed tool reduces the manual labor requirements and allows users to input any SNP that has been identified by any SNP-calling program. In testing the performance of mrSNP on SNPs experimentally validated to affect miRNA binding, mrSNP correctly identified 69% (11/16) of the SNPs disrupting binding.
mrSNP is a highly adaptable and performing tool for predicting the effect a 3’UTR SNP will have on miRNA binding. This tool has advantages over existing algorithms because it can assess the effect of novel SNPs on miRNA binding without requiring significant hands on time.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short regulatory RNAs that down-regulate gene expression. They are essential for cell homeostasis and active in many disease states. A major discovery is the ability of miRNAs to determine the efficacy of drugs, which has given rise to the field of ‘miRNA pharmacogenomics’ through ‘Pharmaco-miRs’. miRNAs play a significant role in pharmacogenomics by down-regulating genes that are important for drug function. These interactions can be described as triplet sets consisting of a miRNA, a target gene and a drug associated with the gene. We have developed a web server which links miRNA expression and drug function by combining data on miRNA targeting and protein–drug interactions. miRNA targeting information derive from both experimental data and computational predictions, and protein–drug interactions are annotated by the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge base (PharmGKB). Pharmaco-miR’s input consists of miRNAs, genes and/or drug names and the output consists of miRNA pharmacogenomic sets or a list of unique associated miRNAs, genes and drugs. We have furthermore built a database, named Pharmaco-miR Verified Sets (VerSe), which contains miRNA pharmacogenomic data manually curated from the literature, can be searched and downloaded via Pharmaco-miR and informs on trends and generalities published in the field. Overall, we present examples of how Pharmaco-miR provides possible explanations for previously published observations, including how the cisplatin and 5-fluorouracil resistance induced by miR-148a may be caused by miR-148a targeting of the gene KIT. The information is available at www.Pharmaco-miR.org.

Protein destabilization is a common mechanism by which amino acid substitutions cause human diseases. Although several machine learning methods have been reported for predicting protein stability changes upon amino acid substitutions, the previous studies did not utilize relevant sequence features representing biological knowledge for classifier construction.
In this study, a new machine learning method has been developed for sequence feature-based prediction of protein stability changes upon amino acid substitutions. Support vector machines were trained with data from experimental studies on the free energy change of protein stability upon mutations. To construct accurate classifiers, twenty sequence features were examined for input vector encoding. It was shown that classifier performance varied significantly by using different sequence features. The most accurate classifier in this study was constructed using a combination of six sequence features. This classifier achieved an overall accuracy of 84.59% with 70.29% sensitivity and 90.98% specificity.
Relevant sequence features can be used to accurately predict protein stability changes upon amino acid substitutions. Predictive results at this level of accuracy may provide useful information to distinguish between deleterious and tolerant alterations in disease candidate genes. To make the classifier accessible to the genetics research community, we have developed a new web server, called MuStab (http://bioinfo.ggc.org/mustab/).

VarioWatch (http://genepipe.ncgm.sinica.edu.tw/variowatch/) has been vastly improved since its former publication GenoWatch in the 2008 Web Server Issue. It is now at least 10 000-times faster in annotating a variant. Drastic speed increase, through complete re-design of its working mechanism, makes VarioWatch capable of annotating millions of human genomic variants generated from next generation sequencing in minutes, if not seconds. While using MegaQuery of VarioWatch to quickly annotate variants, users can apply various filters to retrieve a subgroup of variants according to the risk levels, interested regions, etc. that satisfy users’ requirements. In addition to performance leap, many new features have also been added, such as annotation on novel variants, functional analyses on splice sites and in/dels, detailed variant information in tabulated form, plus a risk level decision tree regarding the analyzed variant. Up to 1000 target variants can be visualized with our carefully designed Genome View, Gene View, Transcript View and Variation View. Two commonly used reference versions, NCBI build 36.3 and NCBI build 37.2, are supported. VarioWatch is unique in its ability to annotate comprehensively and efficiently millions of variants online, immediately delivering the results in real time, plus visualizes up to 1000 annotated variants.

Protein aggregation underlies an increasing number of disorders and constitutes a major bottleneck in the development of therapeutic proteins. Our present understanding on the molecular determinants of protein aggregation has crystalized in a series of predictive algorithms to identify aggregation-prone sites. A majority of these methods rely only on sequence. Therefore, they find difficulties to predict the aggregation properties of folded globular proteins, where aggregation-prone sites are often not contiguous in sequence or buried inside the native structure. The AGGRESCAN3D (A3D) server overcomes these limitations by taking into account the protein structure and the experimental aggregation propensity scale from the well-established AGGRESCAN method. Using the A3D server, the identified aggregation-prone residues can be virtually mutated to design variants with increased solubility, or to test the impact of pathogenic mutations. Additionally, A3D server enables to take into account the dynamic fluctuations of protein structure in solution, which may influence aggregation propensity. This is possible in A3D Dynamic Mode that exploits the CABS-flex approach for the fast simulations of flexibility of globular proteins. The A3D server can be accessed at http://biocomp.chem.uw.edu.pl/A3D/.

Mutations at protein–protein recognition sites alter binding strength by altering the chemical nature of the interacting surfaces. We present a simple surface energy model, parameterized with empirical urn:x-wiley:08873585:media:prot24761:prot24761-math-0001 values, yielding mean energies of −48 cal mol−1 Å−2 for interactions between hydrophobic surfaces, −51 to −80 cal mol−1 Å−2 for surfaces of complementary charge, and 66–83 cal mol−1 Å−2 for electrostatically repelling surfaces, relative to the aqueous phase. This places the mean energy of hydrophobic surface burial at −24 cal mol−1 Å−2. Despite neglecting configurational entropy and intramolecular changes, the model correlates with empirical binding free energies of a functionally diverse set of rigid-body interactions (r = 0.66). When used to rerank docking poses, it can place near-native solutions in the top 10 for 37% of the complexes evaluated, and 82% in the top 100. The method shows that hydrophobic burial is the driving force for protein association, accounting for 50–95% of the cohesive energy. The model is available open-source from http://life.bsc.es/pid/web/surface_energy/ and via the CCharpPPI web server http://life.bsc.es/pid/ccharppi/. Proteins 2015; 83:640–650. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Modern sequencing technologies produce increasingly detailed data on genomic variation. However, conventional methods for relating either individual variants or mutated genes to phenotypes present known limitations given the complex, multigenic nature of many diseases or traits. Here we present PATHiVar, a web-based tool that integrates genomic variation data with gene expression tissue information. PATHiVar constitutes a new generation of genomic data analysis methods that allow studying variants found in next generation sequencing experiment in the context of signaling pathways. Simple Boolean models of pathways provide detailed descriptions of the impact of mutations in cell functionality so as, recurrences in functionality failures can easily be related to diseases, even if they are produced by mutations in different genes. Patterns of changes in signal transmission circuits, often unpredictable from individual genes mutated, correspond to patterns of affected functionalities that can be related to complex traits such as disease progression, drug response, etc. PATHiVar is available at: http://pathivar.babelomics.org.

Repeat proteins have become increasingly important due to their capability to bind to almost any proteins and the potential as alternative therapy to monoclonal antibodies. In the past decade repeat proteins have been designed to mediate specific protein-protein interactions. The tetratricopeptide and ankyrin repeat proteins are two classes of helical repeat proteins that form different binding pockets to accommodate various partners. It is important to understand the factors that define folding and stability of repeat proteins in order to prioritize the most stable designed repeat proteins to further explore their potential binding affinities. Here we developed distance-dependant statistical potentials using two classes of alpha-helical repeat proteins, tetratricopeptide and ankyrin repeat proteins respectively, and evaluated their efficiency in predicting the stability of repeat proteins. We demonstrated that the repeat-specific statistical potentials based on these two classes of repeat proteins showed paramount accuracy compared with non-specific statistical potentials in: 1) discriminate correct vs. incorrect models 2) rank the stability of designed repeat proteins. In particular, the statistical scores correlate closely with the equilibrium unfolding free energies of repeat proteins and therefore would serve as a novel tool in quickly prioritizing the designed repeat proteins with high stability. StaRProtein web server was developed for predicting the stability of repeat proteins.

The IntOGen-mutations platform (http://www.intogen.org/mutations/) summarizes somatic mutations, genes and pathways involved in tumorigenesis. It identifies and visualizes cancer drivers, analyzing 4,623 exomes from 13 cancer sites. It provides support to cancer researchers, aids the identification of drivers across tumor cohorts and helps rank mutations for better clinical decision-making.

The interpretation of cancer-related single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) considering the protein features they affect, such as known functional sites, protein–protein interfaces, or relation with already annotated mutations, might complement the annotation of genetic variants in the analysis of NGS data. Current tools that annotate mutations fall short on several aspects, including the ability to use protein structure information or the interpretation of mutations in protein complexes.
We present the Structure–PPi system for the comprehensive analysis of coding SNVs based on 3D protein structures of protein complexes. The 3D repository used, Interactome3D, includes experimental and modeled structures for proteins and protein–protein complexes. Structure–PPi annotates SNVs with features extracted from UniProt, InterPro, APPRIS, dbNSFP and COSMIC databases. We illustrate the usefulness of Structure–PPi with the interpretation of 1 027 122 non-synonymous SNVs from COSMIC and the 1000G Project that provides a collection of ∼172 700 SNVs mapped onto the protein 3D structure of 8726 human proteins (43.2% of the 20 214 SwissProt-curated proteins in UniProtKB release 2014_06) and protein–protein interfaces with potential functional implications.
Structure–PPi, along with a user manual and examples, isavailable at http://structureppi.bioinfo.cnio.es/Structure, the code for local installations at https://github.com/Rbbt-Workflows

The mutational status of specific cancer lineages can affect the sensitivity to or resistance against cancer drugs. The MACE database provides web-based interactive tools for interpreting large chemical screening and gene expression datasets of cancer cell lines in terms of mutation and lineage categories. GI50 data of chemicals against individual NCI60 cell lines were normalized and organized to statistically identify mutation- or lineage-specific chemical responses. Similarly, DNA microarray data on NCI60 cell lines were processed to analyze mutation- or lineage-specific gene expression signatures. A combined analysis of GI50 and gene expression data to find potential associations between chemicals and genes is also a capability of this system. This database will provide extensive, systematic information to identify lineage- or mutation-specific anticancer agents and related gene targets.
The MACE web database is available at http://mace.sookmyung.ac.kr/.

STRIDE is a software tool for secondary structure assignment from atomic resolution protein structures. It implements a knowledge-based algorithm that makes combined use of hydrogen bond energy and statistically derived backbone torsional angle information and is optimized to return resulting assignments in maximal agreement with crystallographers' designations. The STRIDE web server provides access to this tool and allows visualization of the secondary structure, as well as contact and Ramachandran maps for any file uploaded by the user with atomic coordinates in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) format. A searchable database of STRIDE assignments for the latest PDB release is also provided. The STRIDE server is accessible from http://webclu.bio.wzw.tum.de/stride/.

Availability of computational methods that predict disorder from protein sequences fuels rapid advancements in the protein disorder field. The most accurate predictions are usually obtained with consensus-based approaches. However, their design is performed in an ad hoc manner. We perform first-of-its-kind rational design where we empirically search for an optimal mixture of base methods, selected out of a comprehensive set of 20 modern predictors, and we explore several novel ways to build the consensus. Our method for the prediction of disorder based on Consensus of Predictors (disCoP) combines seven base methods, utilizes custom-designed set of selected 11 features that aggregate base predictions over a sequence window and uses binomial deviance loss-based regression to implement the consensus. Empirical tests performed on an independent benchmark set (with low-sequence similarity compared with proteins used to design disCoP), shows that disCoP provides statistically significant improvements with at least moderate magnitude of differences. disCoP outperforms 28 predictors, including other state-of-the-art consensuses, and achieves Area Under the ROC Curve of .85 and Matthews Correlation Coefficient of .5 compared with .83 and .48 of the best considered approach, respectively. Our consensus provides high rate of correct disorder predictions, especially when low rate of incorrect disorder predictions is desired. We are first to comprehensively assess predictions in the context of several functional types of disorder and we demonstrate that disCoP generates accurate predictions of disorder located at the post-translational modification sites (in particular phosphorylation sites) and in autoregulatory and flexible linker regions. disCoP is available at http://biomine.ece.ualberta.ca/disCoP/.

Contact maps are a convenient method for the structural biologists to identify structural features through two-dimensional simplification. Binary (yes/no) contact maps with a single cutoff distance can be generalized to show continuous distance ranges. We have developed a UCSF Chimera tool, RRDistMaps, to compute such generalized maps in order to analyze pairwise variations in intramolecular contacts. An interactive utility, RRDistMaps, visualizes conformational changes, both local (e.g. binding-site residues) and global (e.g. hinge motion), between unbound and bound proteins through distance patterns. Users can target residue pairs in RRDistMaps for further navigation in Chimera. The interface contains the unique features of identifying long-range residue motion and aligning sequences to simultaneously compare distance maps.
RRDistMaps was developed as part of UCSF Chimera release 1.10, which is freely available at http://rbvi.ucsf.edu/chimera/download.html, and operates on Linux, Windows, and Mac OS.

CSpritz is a web server for the prediction of intrinsic protein disorder. It is a combination of previous Spritz with two novel orthogonal systems developed by our group (Punch and ESpritz). Punch is based on sequence and structural templates trained with support vector machines. ESpritz is an efficient single sequence method based on bidirectional recursive neural networks. Spritz was extended to filter predictions based on structural homologues. After extensive testing, predictions are combined by averaging their probabilities. The CSpritz website can elaborate single or multiple predictions for either short or long disorder. The server provides a global output page, for download and simultaneous statistics of all predictions. Links are provided to each individual protein where the amino acid sequence and disorder prediction are displayed along with statistics for the individual protein. As a novel feature, CSpritz provides information about structural homologues as well as secondary structure and short functional linear motifs in each disordered segment. Benchmarking was performed on the very recent CASP9 data, where CSpritz would have ranked consistently well with a Sw measure of 49.27 and AUC of 0.828. The server, together with help and methods pages including examples, are freely available at URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/cspritz/ .

WebLogo generates sequence logos, graphical representations of the patterns within a multiple sequence alignment. Sequence logos provide a richer and more precise description of sequence similarity than consensus sequences and can rapidly reveal significant features of the alignment otherwise difficult to perceive. Each logo consists of stacks of letters, one stack for each position in the sequence. The overall height of each stack indicates the sequence conservation at that position (measured in bits), whereas the height of symbols within the stack reflects the relative frequency of the corresponding amino or nucleic acid at that position. WebLogo has been enhanced recently with additional features and options, to provide a convenient and highly configurable sequence logo generator. A command line interface and the complete, open WebLogo source code are available for local installation and customization.

Recombinant protein technology is essential for conducting protein science and using proteins as materials in pharmaceutical or industrial applications. Although obtaining soluble proteins is still a major experimental obstacle, knowledge about protein expression/solubility under standard conditions may increase the efficiency and reduce the cost of proteomics studies.
In this study, we present a computational approach to estimate the probability of protein expression and solubility for two different protein expression systems: in vivo Escherichia coli and wheat germ cell-free, from only the sequence information. It implements two kinds of methods: a sequence/predicted structural property-based method that uses both the sequence and predicted structural features, and a sequence pattern-based method that utilizes the occurrence frequencies of sequence patterns. In the benchmark test, the proposed methods obtained F-scores of around 70%, and outperformed publicly available servers. Applying the proposed methods to genomic data revealed that proteins associated with translation or transcription have a strong tendency to be expressed as soluble proteins by the in vivo E. coli expression system. The sequence pattern-based method also has the potential to indicate a candidate region for modification, to increase protein solubility. All methods are available for free at the ESPRESSO server (http://mbs.cbrc.jp/ESPRESSO).

The purpose of this work was to construct a consensus prediction algorithm of ‘aggregation-prone’ peptides in globular proteins, combining existing tools. This allows comparison of the different algorithms and the production of more objective and accurate results. Eleven (11) individual methods are combined and produce AMYLPRED2, a publicly, freely available web tool to academic users (http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/AMYLPRED2), for the consensus prediction of amyloidogenic determinants/‘aggregation-prone’ peptides in proteins, from sequence alone. The performance of AMYLPRED2 indicates that it functions better than individual aggregation-prediction algorithms, as perhaps expected. AMYLPRED2 is a useful tool for identifying amyloid-forming regions in proteins that are associated with several conformational diseases, called amyloidoses, such as Altzheimer's, Parkinson's, prion diseases and type II diabetes. It may also be useful for understanding the properties of protein folding and misfolding and for helping to the control of protein aggregation/solubility in biotechnology (recombinant proteins forming bacterial inclusion bodies) and biotherapeutics (monoclonal antibodies and biopharmaceutical proteins).

We have developed a web server, iPTREE-STAB for discriminating the stability of proteins (stabilizing or destabilizing) and predicting their stability changes (ΔΔG) upon single amino acid substitutions from amino acid sequence. The discrimination and prediction are mainly based on decision tree coupled with adaptive boosting algorithm, and classification and regression tree, respectively, using three neighboring residues of the mutant site along N- and C-terminals. Our method showed an accuracy of 82% for discriminating the stabilizing and destabilizing mutants, and a correlation of 0.70 for predicting protein stability changes upon mutations.
http://bioinformatics.myweb.hinet.net/iptree.htm

SCide is a program to identify stabilization centers from known protein structures. These are residues involved in cooperative long-range contacts, which can be formed between various regions of a single polypeptide chain, or they can belong to different peptides or polypeptides in a complex. The server takes a PDB file as an input, and the result is presented in graphical or text format.
SCide is available on the web at http://www.enzim.hu/scide. The source code can be obtained from the authors on request.

SPROUTS (Structural Prediction for pRotein fOlding UTility System) is a new database that provides access to various structural data sets and integrated functionalities not yet available to the community. The originality of the SPROUTS database is the ability to gain access to a variety of structural analyses at one place and with a strong interaction between them. SPROUTS currently combines data pertaining to 429 structures that capture representative folds and results related to the prediction of critical residues expected to belong to the folding nucleus: the MIR (Most Interacting Residues), the description of the structures in terms of modular fragments: the TEF (Tightened End Fragments), and the calculation at each position of the free energy change gradient upon mutation by one of the 19 amino acids. All database results can be displayed and downloaded in textual files and Excel spreadsheets and visualized on the protein structure. SPROUTS is a unique resource to access as well as visualize state-of-the-art characteristics of protein folding and analyse the effect of point mutations on protein structure. It is available at http://bioinformatics.eas.asu.edu/sprouts.html.

The accurate prediction of protein stability change upon mutation is one of the important issues for protein design. In this work, we have focused on the stability change of double mutations and systematically analyzed the wild-type and mutant residues, patterns in amino acid sequence and locations of mutants. Based on the sequence information of wild-type, mutant and three neighboring residues, we have presented a weighted decision table method (WET) for predicting the stability changes of 180 double mutants obtained from thermal (ΔΔG) denaturation. Using 10-fold cross-validation test, our method showed a correlation of 0.75 between experimental and predicted values of stability changes, and an accuracy of 82.2% for discriminating the stabilizing and destabilizing mutants.
http://bioinformatics.myweb.hinet.net/wetstab.htm

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionized the field of genetics and are trending toward clinical diagnostics. Exome and targeted sequencing in a disease context represent a major NGS clinical application, considering its utility and cost-effectiveness. With the ongoing discovery of disease-associated genes, various gene panels have been launched for both basic research and diagnostic tests. However, the fundamental inconsistencies among the diverse annotation sources, software packages, and data formats have complicated the subsequent analysis. To manage disease-associated NGS data, we developed Vanno, a Web-based application for in-depth analysis and rapid evaluation of disease-causative genome sequence alterations. Vanno integrates information from biomedical databases, functional predictions from available evaluation models, and mutation landscapes from TCGA cancer types. A highly integrated framework that incorporates filtering, sorting, clustering, and visual analytic modules is provided to facilitate exploration of oncogenomics datasets at different levels, such as gene, variant, protein domain, or three-dimensional structure. Such design is crucial for the extraction of knowledge from sequence alterations and translating biological insights into clinical applications. Taken together, Vanno supports almost all disease-associated gene tests and exome sequencing panels designed for NGS, providing a complete solution for targeted and exome sequencing analysis. Vanno is freely available at http://cgts.cgu.edu.tw/vanno.

Mutation position imaging toolbox (MuPIT) interactive is a browser-based application for single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), which automatically maps the genomic coordinates of SNVs onto the coordinates of available three-dimensional (3D) protein structures. The application is designed for interactive browser-based visualization of the putative functional relevance of SNVs by biologists who are not necessarily experts either in bioinformatics or protein structure. Users may submit batches of several thousand SNVs and review all protein structures that cover the SNVs, including available functional annotations such as binding sites, mutagenesis experiments, and common polymorphisms. Multiple SNVs may be mapped onto each structure, enabling 3D visualization of SNV clusters and their relationship to functionally annotated positions. We illustrate the utility of MuPIT interactive in rationalizing the impact of selected polymorphisms in the PharmGKB database, somatic mutations identified in the Cancer Genome Atlas study of invasive breast carcinomas, and rare variants identified in the exome sequencing project. MuPIT interactive is freely available for non-profit use at http://mupit.icm.jhu.edu.

In this paper, we propose an interactive visualization called VERMONT which tackles the problem of visualizing mutations and infers their possible effects on the conservation of physicochemical and topological properties in protein families. More specifically, we visualize a set of structure-based sequence alignments and integrate several structural parameters that should aid biologists in gaining insight into possible consequences of mutations. VERMONT allowed us to identify patterns of position-specific properties as well as exceptions that may help predict whether specific mutations could damage protein function.

A huge amount of data about genomes and sequence variation is available and continues to grow on a large scale, which makes experimentally characterizing these mutations infeasible regarding disease association and effects on protein structure and function. Therefore, reliable computational approaches are needed to support the understanding of mutations and their impacts. Here, we present VERMONT 2.0, a visual interactive platform that combines sequence and structural parameters with interactive visualizations to make the impact of protein point mutations more understandable.
We aimed to contribute a novel visual analytics oriented method to analyze and gain insight on the impact of protein point mutations. To assess the ability of VERMONT to do this, we visually examined a set of mutations that were experimentally characterized to determine if VERMONT could identify damaging mutations and why they can be considered so.
VERMONT allowed us to understand mutations by interpreting position-specific structural and physicochemical properties. Additionally, we note some specific positions we believe have an impact on protein function/structure in the case of mutation.

Driver mutations are somatic mutations that provide growth advantage to tumor cells, while passenger mutations are those not functionally related to oncogenesis. Distinguishing drivers from passengers is challenging because drivers occur much less frequently than passengers, they tend to have low prevalence, their functions are multifactorial and not intuitively obvious. Missense mutations are excellent candidates as drivers, as they occur more frequently and are potentially easier to identify than other types of mutations. Although several methods have been developed for predicting the functional impact of missense mutations, only a few have been specifically designed for identifying driver mutations. As more mutations are being discovered, more accurate predictive models can be developed using machine learning approaches that systematically characterize the commonality and peculiarity of missense mutations under the background of specific cancer types. Here, we present a cancer driver annotation (CanDrA) tool that predicts missense driver mutations based on a set of 95 structural and evolutionary features computed by over 10 functional prediction algorithms such as CHASM, SIFT, and MutationAssessor. Through feature optimization and supervised training, CanDrA outperforms existing tools in analyzing the glioblastoma multiforme and ovarian carcinoma data sets in The Cancer Genome Atlas and the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia project.

Knowledge of the 3D structure and functionality of proteins can lead to insight into the associated cellular processes, speed up the creation of pharmaceutical products, and develop drugs that are more effective in combating disease.
We present the design and implementation of a visual mining and analysis tool to help identify protein mutations across a family of structural models and to help discover the effect of these mutations on protein function. We integrate 3D structure and sequence information in a common visual interface; multiple linked views and a computational backbone allow comparison at the molecular and atomic levels, while a novel trend-image visual abstraction allows for the sorting and mining of large collections of sequences and of their residues.
We evaluate our approach on the triosephosphate isomerase (TIM) family structural models and sequence data and show that our tool provides an effective, scalable way to navigate a family of proteins, as well as a means to inspect the structure and sequence of individual proteins.
The TIM application shows that our tool can assist in the navigation of families of proteins, as well as in the exploration of individual protein structures. In conjunction with domain expert knowledge, this interactive tool can help provide biophysical insight into why specific mutations affect function and potentially suggest additional modifications to the protein that could be used to rescue functionality.

Frameshifting (FS) indels and nonsense (NS) variants disrupt the protein-coding sequence downstream of the mutation site by changing the reading frame or introducing a premature termination codon, respectively. Despite such drastic changes to the protein sequence, FS indels and NS variants have been discovered in healthy individuals. How to discriminate disease-causing from neutral FS indels and NS variants is an understudied problem.
We have built a machine learning method called DDIG-in (FS) based on real human genetic variations from the Human Gene Mutation Database (inherited disease-causing) and the 1000 Genomes Project (GP) (putatively neutral). The method incorporates both sequence and predicted structural features and yields a robust performance by 10-fold cross-validation and independent tests on both FS indels and NS variants. We showed that human-derived NS variants and FS indels derived from animal orthologs can be effectively employed for independent testing of our method trained on human-derived FS indels. DDIG-in (FS) achieves a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.59, a sensitivity of 86%, and a specificity of 72% for FS indels. Application of DDIG-in (FS) to NS variants yields essentially the same performance (MCC of 0.43) as a method that was specifically trained for NS variants. DDIG-in (FS) was shown to make a significant improvement over existing techniques.
The DDIG-in web-server for predicting NS variants, FS indels, and non-frameshifting (NFS) indels is available at http://sparks-lab.org/ddig.

More reliable and faster prediction methods are needed to interpret enormous amounts of data generated by sequencing and genome projects. We have developed a new computational tool, PON-P2, for classification of amino acid substitutions in human proteins. The method is a machine learning-based classifier and groups the variants into pathogenic, neutral and unknown classes, on the basis of random forest probability score. PON-P2 is trained using pathogenic and neutral variants obtained from VariBench, a database for benchmark variation datasets. PON-P2 utilizes information about evolutionary conservation of sequences, physical and biochemical properties of amino acids, GO annotations and if available, functional annotations of variation sites. Extensive feature selection was performed to identify 8 informative features among altogether 622 features. PON-P2 consistently showed superior performance in comparison to existing state-of-the-art tools. In 10-fold cross-validation test, its accuracy and MCC are 0.90 and 0.80, respectively, and in the independent test, they are 0.86 and 0.71, respectively. The coverage of PON-P2 is 61.7% in the 10-fold cross-validation and 62.1% in the test dataset. PON-P2 is a powerful tool for screening harmful variants and for ranking and prioritizing experimental characterization. It is very fast making it capable of analyzing large variant datasets. PON-P2 is freely available at http://structure.bmc.lu.se/PON-P2/.

For development and evaluation of methods for predicting the effects of variations, benchmark datasets are needed. Some previously developed datasets are available for this purpose, but newer and larger benchmark sets for benign variants have largely been missing. VariSNP datasets are selected from dbSNP. These subsets were filtered against disease-related variants in the ClinVar, UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, and PhenCode databases, to identify neutral or nonpathogenic cases. All variant descriptions include mapping to reference sequences on chromosomal, genomic, coding DNA, and protein levels. The datasets will be updated with automated scripts on a regular basis and are freely available at http://structure.bmc.lu.se/VariSNP.

The AUTO-MUTE 2.0 stand-alone software package includes a collection of programs for predicting functional changes to proteins upon single residue substitutions, developed by combining structure-based features with trained statistical learning models. Three of the predictors evaluate changes to protein stability upon mutation, each complementing a distinct experimental approach. Two additional classifiers are available, one for predicting activity changes due to residue replacements and the other for determining the disease potential of mutations associated with nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in human proteins. These five command-line driven tools, as well as all the supporting programs, complement those that run our AUTO-MUTE web-based server. Nevertheless, all the codes have been rewritten and substantially altered for the new portable software, and they incorporate several new features based on user feedback. Included among these upgrades is the ability to perform three highly requested tasks: to run “big data” batch jobs; to generate predictions using modified protein data bank (PDB) structures, and unpublished personal models prepared using standard PDB file formatting; and to utilize NMR structure files that contain multiple models.

Utilizing cutting-edge supervised classification and regression algorithms, three web-based tools have been developed for predicting stability changes upon single residue substitutions in proteins with known native structures. Trained models classify independent mutant test sets with accuracies ranging from 87 to 94%. Attributes representing each mutant protein are based on a computational mutagenesis methodology relying on a four-body statistical potential, illustrating a novel integration of both energy-based and machine learning approaches. The servers are written in PHP and hosted on a Linux platform, and they can be freely accessed online along with detailed data sets, documentation and performance results at http://proteins.gmu.edu/automute.

The rapid growth of un-annotated missense variants poses challenges requiring novel strategies for their interpretation. From the thermodynamic point of view, amino acid changes can lead to a change in the internal energy of a protein and induce structural rearrangements. This is of great relevance for the study of diseases and protein design, justifying the development of prediction methods for variant-induced stability changes.
Here we propose NeEMO, a tool for the evaluation of stability changes using an effective representation of proteins based on residue interaction networks (RINs). RINs are used to extract useful features describing interactions of the mutant amino acid with its structural environment. Benchmarking shows NeEMO to be very effective, allowing reliable predictions in different parts of the protein such as β-strands and buried residues. Validation on a previously published independent dataset shows that NeEMO has a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.77 and a standard error of 1 Kcal/mol, outperforming nine recent methods. The NeEMO web server can be freely accessed from URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/neemo/.
NeEMO offers an innovative and reliable tool for the annotation of amino acid changes. A key contribution are RINs, which can be used for modeling proteins and their interactions effectively. Interestingly, the approach is very general, and can motivate the development of a new family of RIN-based protein structure analyzers. NeEMO may suggest innovative strategies for bioinformatics tools beyond protein stability prediction.

The advance of next-generation sequencing technologies has made exome sequencing rapid and relatively inexpensive. A major application of exome sequencing is the identification of genetic variations likely to cause Mendelian diseases. This requires processing large amounts of sequence information and therefore computational approaches that can accurately and efficiently identify the subset of disease-associated variations are needed. The accuracy and high false positive rates of existing computational tools leave much room for improvement. Here, we develop a boosted tree regression machine-learning approach to predict human disease-associated amino acid variations by utilizing a comprehensive combination of protein sequence and structure features. On comparing our method, ENTPRISE, to the state-of-the-art methods SIFT, PolyPhen-2, MUTATIONASSESSOR, MUTATIONTASTER, FATHMM, ENTPRISE exhibits significant improvement. In particular, on a testing dataset consisting of only proteins with balanced disease-associated and neutral variations defined as having the ratio of neutral/disease-associated variations between 0.3 and 3, the Mathews Correlation Coefficient by ENTPRISE is 0.493 as compared to 0.432 by PPH2-HumVar, 0.406 by SIFT, 0.403 by MUTATIONASSESSOR, 0.402 by PPH2-HumDiv, 0.305 by MUTATIONTASTER, and 0.181 by FATHMM. ENTPRISE is then applied to nucleic acid binding proteins in the human proteome. Disease-associated predictions are shown to be highly correlated with the number of protein-protein interactions. Both these predictions and the ENTPRISE server are freely available for academic users as a web service at http://cssb.biology.gatech.edu/entprise/.

Drug resistance is a major challenge for the treatment of many diseases and a significant concern throughout the drug development process. The ability to understand and predict the effects of mutations on protein–ligand affinities and their roles in the emergence of resistance would significantly aid treatment and drug design strategies. In order to study and understand the impacts of missense mutations on the interaction of ligands with the proteome, we have developed Platinum (http://structure.bioc.cam.ac.uk/platinum). This manually curated, literature-derived database, comprising over 1000 mutations, associates for the first time experimental information on changes in affinity with three-dimensional structures of protein–ligand complexes. To minimize differences arising from experimental techniques and to directly compare binding affinities, Platinum considers only changes measured by the same group and with the same amino-acid sequence used for structure determination, providing a direct link between protein structure, how a ligand binds and how mutations alter the affinity of the ligand of the protein. We believe Platinum will be an invaluable resource for understanding the effects of mutations that give rise to drug resistance, a major problem emerging in pandemics including those caused by the influenza virus, in infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, in cancer and in many other life-threatening illnesses.

In directed evolution experiments, it is at stake to have methods to screen efficiently the mutant libraries. We propose a web-based tool that implements an established in silico method for the rational screening of mutant libraries. The method, known as ProSAR, attempts to link sequence data to activity. The method uses statistical models trained on small experimental datasets provided by the user. These can integrate potential epistatic interactions between mutations and be used in many diverse biological contexts. It drastically improves the search for leading mutants. The tool is freely available to non-commercial users at http://bo-protscience.fr/prosar/.

Tuberculosis is an infectious bacterial disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It remains a major health threat, killing over one million people every year worldwide. An early antibiotic therapy is the basis of the treatment, and the emergence and spread of multidrug and extensively drug-resistant mutant strains raise significant challenges. As these bacteria grow very slowly, drug resistance mutations are currently detected using molecular biology techniques. Resistance mutations are identified by sequencing the resistance-linked genes followed by a comparison with the literature data. The only online database is the TB Drug Resistance Mutation database (TBDReaM database); however, it requires mutation detection before use, and its interrogation is complex due to its loose syntax and grammar.
The MUBII-TB-DB database is a simple, highly structured text-based database that contains a set of Mycobacterium tuberculosis mutations (DNA and proteins) occurring at seven loci: rpoB, pncA, katG; mabA(fabG1)-inhA, gyrA, gyrB, and rrs. Resistance mutation data were extracted after the systematic review of MEDLINE referenced publications before March 2013. MUBII analyzes the query sequence obtained by PCR-sequencing using two parallel strategies: i) a BLAST search against a set of previously reconstructed mutated sequences and ii) the alignment of the query sequences (DNA and its protein translation) with the wild-type sequences. The post-treatment includes the extraction of the aligned sequences together with their descriptors (position and nature of mutations). The whole procedure is performed using the internet. The results are graphs (alignments) and text (description of the mutation, therapeutic significance). The system is quick and easy to use, even for technicians without bioinformatics training.
MUBII-TB-DB is a structured database of the mutations occurring at seven loci of major therapeutic value in tuberculosis management. Moreover, the system provides interpretation of the mutations in biological and therapeutic terms and can evolve by the addition of newly described mutations. Its goal is to provide easy and comprehensive access through a client–server model over the Web to an up-to-date database of mutations that lead to the resistance of M. tuberculosis to antibiotics.

Protein C is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein zymogen whose genetic mild or severe deficiencies are linked with risk for venous thrombosis or neonatal purpura fulminans, respectively. Studies over past decades showed that activated protein C (APC) inactivates factors (F) Va and VIIIa to down-regulate thrombin generation. More recent basic and preclinical research on APC has characterized the direct cytoprotective effects of APC that involve gene expression profile alterations, anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic activities and endothelial barrier stabilization. These actions generally require endothelial cell protein C receptor (EPCR) and protease activated receptor-1. Because of these direct cytoprotective actions, APC reduces mortality in murine endotoxemia and severe sepsis models and provides neuroprotective benefits in murine ischemic stroke models. Furthermore, APC reduces mortality in patients with severe sepsis (PROWESS clinical trial). Although much remains to be clarified about mechanisms for APC's direct effects on various cell types, it is clear that APC's molecular features that determine its antithrombotic action are partially distinct from those providing cytoprotective actions because we have engineered recombinant APC variants with selective reduction or retention of either anticoagulant or cytoprotective activities. Such APC variants can provide relatively enhanced levels of either cytoprotective or anticoagulant activities for various therapeutic applications. We speculate that APC variants with reduced anticoagulant action but normal cytoprotective actions hold the promise of reducing bleeding risk because of attenuated anticoagulant activity while reducing mortality based on direct cytoprotective effects on cells.

Blood coagulation proteins (BCPs) play a major role in hemostasis.1  Except for a few that have their own dedicated databases, information on most BCPs are scattered across various disparate data sources in multiple formats. This information has been compiled, manually curated, and assembled into a knowledgebase called ClotBase with the aim of accelerating clinical diagnosis and research in the area of coagulation disorders (Table 1). It presents up-to-date information on all aspects of BCPs ranging from sequence and structure information, source organisms, function, subcellular location, tissue specificity and related literature. Links to external databases such as PubMed, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Protein Information Resource, Protein Data Bank, and Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man are also provided for retrieval of additional information on BCPs. The interactive search features permit easy retrieval of the information available in ClotBase.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are among the most common types of genetic variation in complex genetic disorders. A growing number of studies link the functional role of SNPs with the networks and pathways mediated by the disease-associated genes. For example, many non-synonymous missense SNPs (nsSNPs) have been found near or inside the protein-protein interaction (PPI) interfaces. Determining whether such nsSNP will disrupt or preserve a PPI is a challenging task to address, both experimentally and computationally. Here, we present this task as three related classification problems, and develop a new computational method, called the SNP-IN tool (non-synonymous SNP INteraction effect predictor). Our method predicts the effects of nsSNPs on PPIs, given the interaction's structure. It leverages supervised and semi-supervised feature-based classifiers, including our new Random Forest self-learning protocol. The classifiers are trained based on a dataset of comprehensive mutagenesis studies for 151 PPI complexes, with experimentally determined binding affinities of the mutant and wild-type interactions. Three classification problems were considered: (1) a 2-class problem (strengthening/weakening PPI mutations), (2) another 2-class problem (mutations that disrupt/preserve a PPI), and (3) a 3-class classification (detrimental/neutral/beneficial mutation effects). In total, 11 different supervised and semi-supervised classifiers were trained and assessed resulting in a promising performance, with the weighted f-measure ranging from 0.87 for Problem 1 to 0.70 for the most challenging Problem 3. By integrating prediction results of the 2-class classifiers into the 3-class classifier, we further improved its performance for Problem 3. To demonstrate the utility of SNP-IN tool, it was applied to study the nsSNP-induced rewiring of two disease-centered networks. The accurate and balanced performance of SNP-IN tool makes it readily available to study the rewiring of large-scale protein-protein interaction networks, and can be useful for functional annotation of disease-associated SNPs. SNIP-IN tool is freely accessible as a web-server at http://korkinlab.org/snpintool/.

Hemophilia B (HB) is caused by mutations in the human gene F9. The mutation type plays a pivotal role in genetic counseling and prediction of inhibitor development. To help the HB community understand the molecular etiology of HB, we have developed a listing of all F9 mutations that are reported to cause HB based on the literature and existing databases. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Hemophilia B Mutation Project (CHBMP) mutation list is compiled in an easily accessible format of Microsoft Excel and contains 1083 unique mutations that are reported to cause HB. Each mutation is identified using Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS) nomenclature standards. The mutation types and the predicted changes in amino acids, if applicable, are also provided. Related information including the location of mutation, severity of HB, the presence of inhibitor, and original publication reference are listed as well. Therefore, our mutation list provides an easily accessible resource for genetic counselors and HB researchers to predict inhibitors. The CHBMP mutation list is freely accessible at http://www.cdc.gov/hemophiliamutations.

The abbreviated name, ‘mfold web server’, describes a number of closely related software applications available on the World Wide Web (WWW) for the prediction of the secondary structure of single stranded nucleic acids. The objective of this web server is to provide easy access to RNA and DNA folding and hybridization software to the scientific community at large. By making use of universally available web GUIs (Graphical User Interfaces), the server circumvents the problem of portability of this software. Detailed output, in the form of structure plots with or without reliability information, single strand frequency plots and ‘energy dot plots’, are available for the folding of single sequences. A variety of ‘bulk’ servers give less information, but in a shorter time and for up to hundreds of sequences at once. The portal for the mfold web server is http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/mfold. This URL will be referred to as ‘MFOLDROOT’.

The UNAFold software package is an integrated collection of programs that simulate folding, hybridization, and melting pathways for one or two single-stranded nucleic acid sequences. The name is derived from “Unified Nucleic Acid Folding.” Folding (secondary structure) prediction for single-stranded RNA or DNA combines free energy minimization, partition function calculations and stochastic sampling. For melting simulations, the package computes entire melting profiles, not just melting temperatures. UV absorbance at 260 nm, heat capacity change (Cp), and mole fractions of different molecular species are computed as a function of temperature. The package installs and runs on all Unix and Linux platforms that we have looked at, including Mac OS X. Images of secondary structures, hybridizations, and dot plots may be computed using common formats. Similarly, a variety of melting profile plots is created when appropriate. These latter plots include experimental results if they are provided. The package is “command line” driven. Underlying compiled programs may be used individually, or in special combinations through the use of a variety of Perl scripts. Users are encouraged to create their own scripts to supplement what comes with the package. This evolving software is available for download at http://www.bioinfo.rpi.edu/applications/hybrid/download.php.

As next-generation sequencing projects generate massive genome-wide sequence variation data, bioinformatics tools are being developed to provide computational predictions on the functional effects of sequence variations and narrow down the search of casual variants for disease phenotypes. Different classes of sequence variations at the nucleotide level are involved in human diseases, including substitutions, insertions, deletions, frameshifts, and non-sense mutations. Frameshifts and non-sense mutations are likely to cause a negative effect on protein function. Existing prediction tools primarily focus on studying the deleterious effects of single amino acid substitutions through examining amino acid conservation at the position of interest among related sequences, an approach that is not directly applicable to insertions or deletions. Here, we introduce a versatile alignment-based score as a new metric to predict the damaging effects of variations not limited to single amino acid substitutions but also in-frame insertions, deletions, and multiple amino acid substitutions. This alignment-based score measures the change in sequence similarity of a query sequence to a protein sequence homolog before and after the introduction of an amino acid variation to the query sequence. Our results showed that the scoring scheme performs well in separating disease-associated variants (n = 21,662) from common polymorphisms (n = 37,022) for UniProt human protein variations, and also in separating deleterious variants (n = 15,179) from neutral variants (n = 17,891) for UniProt non-human protein variations. In our approach, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for the human and non-human protein variation datasets is ∼0.85. We also observed that the alignment-based score correlates with the deleteriousness of a sequence variation. In summary, we have developed a new algorithm, PROVEAN (Protein Variation Effect Analyzer), which provides a generalized approach to predict the functional effects of protein sequence variations including single or multiple amino acid substitutions, and in-frame insertions and deletions. The PROVEAN tool is available online at http://provean.jcvi.org.

Whole-genome and exome sequencing studies reveal many genetic variants between individuals, some of which are linked to disease. Many of these variants lead to single amino acid variants (SAVs), and accurate prediction of their phenotypic impact is important. Incorporating sequence conservation and network-level features, we have developed a method, SuSPect (Disease-Susceptibility-based SAV Phenotype Prediction), for predicting how likely SAVs are to be associated with disease. SuSPect performs significantly better than other available batch methods on the VariBench benchmarking dataset, with a balanced accuracy of 82%. SuSPect is available at www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/suspect. The Web site has been implemented in Perl and SQLite and is compatible with modern browsers. An SQLite database of possible missense variants in the human proteome is available to download at www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk/suspect/download.html.

PredictProtein (http://www.predictprotein.org) is an Internet service for sequence analysis and the prediction of protein structure and function. Users submit protein sequences or alignments; PredictProtein returns multiple sequence alignments, PROSITE sequence motifs, low-complexity regions (SEG), nuclear localization signals, regions lacking regular structure (NORS) and predictions of secondary structure, solvent accessibility, globular regions, transmembrane helices, coiled-coil regions, structural switch regions, disulfide-bonds, sub-cellular localization and functional annotations. Upon request fold recognition by prediction-based threading, CHOP domain assignments, predictions of transmembrane strands and inter-residue contacts are also available. For all services, users can submit their query either by electronic mail or interactively via the World Wide Web.

Unravelling the genotype–phenotype relationship in humans remains a challenging task in genomics studies. Recent advances in sequencing technologies mean there are now thousands of sequenced human genomes, revealing millions of single nucleotide variants (SNVs). For non-synonymous SNVs present in proteins the difficulties of the problem lie in first identifying those nsSNVs that result in a functional change in the protein among the many non-functional variants and in turn linking this functional change to phenotype. Here we present VarMod (Variant Modeller) a method that utilises both protein sequence and structural features to predict nsSNVs that alter protein function. VarMod develops recent observations that functional nsSNVs are enriched at protein–protein interfaces and protein–ligand binding sites and uses these characteristics to make predictions. In benchmarking on a set of nearly 3000 nsSNVs VarMod performance is comparable to an existing state of the art method. The VarMod web server provides extensive resources to investigate the sequence and structural features associated with the predictions including visualisation of protein models and complexes via an interactive JSmol molecular viewer. VarMod is available for use at http://www.wasslab.org/varmod.

Temperature sensitive (Ts) mutants of proteins provide experimentalists with a powerful and reversible way of conditionally expressing genes. The technique has been widely used in determining the role of gene and gene products in several cellular processes. Traditionally, Ts mutants are generated by random mutagenesis and then selected though laborious large-scale screening. Our web server, TSpred (http://mspc.bii.a-star.edu.sg/TSpred/), now enables users to rationally design Ts mutants for their proteins of interest. TSpred uses hydrophobicity and hydrophobic moment, deduced from primary sequence and residue depth, inferred from 3D structures to predict/identify buried hydrophobic residues. Mutating these residues leads to the creation of Ts mutants. Our method has been experimentally validated in 36 positions in six different proteins. It is an attractive proposition for Ts mutant engineering as it proposes a small number of mutations and with high precision. The accompanying web server is simple and intuitive to use and can handle proteins and protein complexes of different sizes.

Cancer genome and other sequencing initiatives are generating extensive data on non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) in human and other genomes. In order to understand the impacts of nsSNPs on the structure and function of the proteome, as well as to guide protein engineering, accurate in silicomethodologies are required to study and predict their effects on protein stability. Despite the diversity of available computational methods in the literature, none has proven accurate and dependable on its own under all scenarios where mutation analysis is required. Here we present DUET, a web server for an integrated computational approach to study missense mutations in proteins. DUET consolidates two complementary approaches (mCSM and SDM) in a consensus prediction, obtained by combining the results of the separate methods in an optimized predictor using Support Vector Machines (SVM). We demonstrate that the proposed method improves overall accuracy of the predictions in comparison with either method individually and performs as well as or better than similar methods. The DUET web server is freely and openly available at http://structure.bioc.cam.ac.uk/duet.

A major challenge in the proteomics and structural genomics era is to predict protein structure and function, including identification of those proteins that are partially or wholly unstructured. Non-globular sequence segments often contain short linear peptide motifs (e.g. SH3-binding sites) which are important for protein function. We present here a new tool for discovery of such unstructured, or disordered regions within proteins. GlobPlot (http://globplot.embl.de) is a web service that allows the user to plot the tendency within the query protein for order/globularity and disorder. We show examples with known proteins where it successfully identifies inter-domain segments containing linear motifs, and also apparently ordered regions that do not contain any recognised domain. GlobPlot may be useful in domain hunting efforts. The plots indicate that instances of known domains may often contain additional N- or C-terminal segments that appear ordered. Thus GlobPlot may be of use in the design of constructs corresponding to globular proteins, as needed for many biochemical studies, particularly structural biology. GlobPlot has a pipeline interface—GlobPipe—for the advanced user to do whole proteome analysis. GlobPlot can also be used as a generic infrastructure package for graphical displaying of any possible propensity.

Many proteins contain intrinsically disordered regions, which may be crucial for function, but on the other hand be related to the pathogenicity of variants. Prediction programs have been developed to detect disordered regions from sequences and used to predict the consequences of variants, although their performance for this task has not been assessed. We tested the performance of protein disorder prediction programs in detecting changes to disorder caused by amino acid substitutions. We assessed the performance of 29 protein disorder predictors and versions with 101 amino acid substitutions, whose effects have been experimentally validated. Disorder predictors detected the true positives at most with 6% success rate and true negatives with 34% rate for variants. The corresponding rates for the wild-type forms are 7% and 90%, respectively. The analysis revealed that disorder programs cannot reliably predict the effects of substitutions; consequently, the tested methods, and possibly similar programs, cannot be recommended for variant analysis without other information indicating to the relevance of disorder. These results inspired us to develop a new method, PON-Diso (http://structure.bmc.lu.se/PON-Diso), for disorder-related amino acid substitutions. With 50% success rate for independent test set and 70.5% rate in cross-validation, it outperforms the evaluated methods.

Salt bridges can play important roles in protein structure and function and have stabilizing and destabilizing effects in protein folding. ESBRI is a software available as web tool which analyses the salt bridges in a protein structure, starting from the atomic coordinates. In the case of protein complexes, the salt bridges between protein chains can be evaluated, as well as those among specific charged amino acids and the different protein subunits, in order to obtain useful information regard the protein-protein interaction.

Members of the protein kinase family are amongst the most commonly mutated genes in human cancer, and both mutated and activated protein kinases have proved to be tractable targets for the development of new anticancer therapies The MoKCa database (Mutations of Kinases in Cancer, http://strubiol.icr.ac.uk/extra/mokca) has been developed to structurally and functionally annotate, and where possible predict, the phenotypic consequences of mutations in protein kinases implicated in cancer. Somatic mutation data from tumours and tumour cell lines have been mapped onto the crystal structures of the affected protein domains. Positions of the mutated amino-acids are highlighted on a sequence-based domain pictogram, as well as a 3D-image of the protein structure, and in a molecular graphics package, integrated for interactive viewing. The data associated with each mutation is presented in the Web interface, along with expert annotation of the detailed molecular functional implications of the mutation. Proteins are linked to functional annotation resources and are annotated with structural and functional features such as domains and phosphorylation sites. MoKCa aims to provide assessments available from multiple sources and algorithms for each potential cancer-associated mutation, and present these together in a consistent and coherent fashion to facilitate authoritative annotation by cancer biologists and structural biologists, directly involved in the generation and analysis of new mutational data.

We have developed a web tool, PupaSuite, for the selection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with potential phenotypic effect, specifically oriented to help in the design of large-scale genotyping projects. PupaSuite uses a collection of data on SNPs from heterogeneous sources and a large number of pre-calculated predictions to offer a flexible and intuitive interface for selecting an optimal set of SNPs. It improves the functionality of PupaSNP and PupasView programs and implements new facilities such as the analysis of user's data to derive haplotypes with functional information. A new estimator of putative effect of polymorphisms has been included that uses evolutionary information. Also SNPeffect database predictions have been included. The PupaSuite web interface is accessible through http://pupasuite.bioinfo.cipf.es and through http://www.pupasnp.org .

The identification of functionally or structurally important non-conserved residue sites in protein MSAs is an important challenge for understanding the structural basis and molecular mechanism of protein functions. Despite the rich literature on compensatory mutations as well as sequence conservation analysis for the detection of those important residues, previous methods often rely on classical information-theoretic measures. However, these measures usually do not take into account dis/similarities of amino acids which are likely to be crucial for those residues. In this study, we present a new method, the Quantum Coupled Mutation Finder (QCMF) that incorporates significant dis/similar amino acid pair signals in the prediction of functionally or structurally important sites.
The result of this study is twofold. First, using the essential sites of two human proteins, namely epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and glucokinase (GCK), we tested the QCMF-method. The QCMF includes two metrics based on quantum Jensen-Shannon divergence to measure both sequence conservation and compensatory mutations. We found that the QCMF reaches an improved performance in identifying essential sites from MSAs of both proteins with a significantly higher Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) value in comparison to previous methods. Second, using a data set of 153 proteins, we made a pairwise comparison between QCMF and three conventional methods. This comparison study strongly suggests that QCMF complements the conventional methods for the identification of correlated mutations in MSAs.
QCMF utilizes the notion of entanglement, which is a major resource of quantum information, to model significant dissimilar and similar amino acid pair signals in the detection of functionally or structurally important sites. Our results suggest that on the one hand QCMF significantly outperforms the previous method, which mainly focuses on dissimilar amino acid signals, to detect essential sites in proteins. On the other hand, it is complementary to the existing methods for the identification of correlated mutations. The method of QCMF is computationally intensive. To ensure a feasible computation time of the QCMF’s algorithm, we leveraged Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA).
The QCMF server is freely accessible at http://qcmf.informatik.uni-goettingen.de/.

Recently, several methods for analyzing phenotype data have been published, but only few are able to cope with data sets generated in different studies, with different methods, or for different species. We developed an online system in which more than 300 000 phenotypes from a wide variety of sources and screening methods can be analyzed together. Clusters of similar phenotypes are visualized as networks of highly similar phenotypes, inducing gene groups useful for functional analysis. This system is part of PhenomicDB, providing the world's largest cross-species phenotype data collection with a tool to mine its wealth of information.
Freely available at http://www.phenomicdb.de

Information about drug-target relations is at the heart of drug discovery. There are now dozens of databases providing drug-target interaction data with varying scope, and focus. Therefore, and due to the large chemical space, the overlap of the different data sets is surprisingly small. As searching through these sources manually is cumbersome, time-consuming and error-prone, integrating all the data is highly desirable. Despite a few attempts, integration has been hampered by the diversity of descriptions of compounds, and by the fact that the reported activity values, coming from different data sets, are not always directly comparable due to usage of different metrics or data formats.
We have built Drug2Gene, a knowledge base, which combines the compound/drug-gene/protein information from 19 publicly available databases. A key feature is our rigorous unification and standardization process which makes the data truly comparable on a large scale, allowing for the first time effective data mining in such a large knowledge corpus. As of version 3.2, Drug2Gene contains 4,372,290 unified relations between compounds and their targets most of which include reported bioactivity data. We extend this set with putative (i.e. homology-inferred) relations where sufficient sequence homology between proteins suggests they may bind to similar compounds. Drug2Gene provides powerful search functionalities, very flexible export procedures, and a user-friendly web interface.
Drug2Gene v3.2 has become a mature and comprehensive knowledge base providing unified, standardized drug-target related information gathered from publicly available data sources. It can be used to integrate proprietary data sets with publicly available data sets. Its main goal is to be a ‘one-stop shop’ to identify tool compounds targeting a given gene product or for finding all known targets of a drug. Drug2Gene with its integrated data set of public compound-target relations is freely accessible without restrictions at http://www.drug2gene.com.

It has been proposed that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) discovered by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) account for only a small fraction of the genetic variation of complex traits in human population. The remaining unexplained variance or missing heritability is thought to be due to marginal effects of many loci with small effects and has eluded attempts to identify its sources. Combination of different studies appears to resolve in part this problem. However, neither individual GWAS nor meta-analytic combinations thereof are helpful for disclosing which genetic variants contribute to explain a particular phenotype. Here, we propose that most of the missing heritability is latent in the GWAS data, which conceals intermediate phenotypes. To uncover such latent information, we propose the PGMRA server that introduces phenomics—the full set of phenotype features of an individual—to identify SNP-set structures in a broader sense, i.e. causally cohesive genotype–phenotype relations. These relations are agnostically identified (without considering disease status of the subjects) and organized in an interpretable fashion. Then, by incorporating a posteriori the subject status within each relation, we can establish the risk surface of a disease in an unbiased mode. This approach complements—instead of replaces—current analysis methods. The server is publically available at http://phop.ugr.es/fenogeno.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revolutionized the search for the variants underlying human complex diseases. However, in a typical GWAS, only a minority of the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the strongest evidence of association is explained. One possible reason of complex diseases is the alterations in the activity of several biological pathways. Here we present a web server called Pathway and Network-Oriented GWAS Analysis to devise functionally important pathways through the identification of SNP-targeted genes within these pathways. The strength of our methodology stems from its multidimensional perspective, where we combine evidence from the following five resources: (i) genetic association information obtained through GWAS, (ii) SNP functional information, (iii) protein–protein interaction network, (iv) linkage disequilibrium and (v) biochemical pathways.
PANOGA web server is freely available at: http://panoga.sabanciuniv.edu/. The source code is available to academic users ‘as is’ on request.

The recent advances in genome sequencing have revealed an abundance of non-synonymous polymorphisms among human individuals; subsequently, it is of immense interest and importance to predict whether such substitutions are functional neutral or have deleterious effects. The accuracy of such prediction algorithms depends on the quality of the multiple-sequence alignment, which is used to infer how an amino acid substitution is tolerated at a given position. Because of the scarcity of orthologous protein sequences in the past, the existing prediction algorithms all include sequences of protein paralogs in the alignment, which can dilute the conservation signal and affect prediction accuracy. However, we believe that, with the sequencing of a large number of mammalian genomes, it is now feasible to include only protein orthologs in the alignment and improve the prediction performance.
We have developed a novel prediction algorithm, named SNPdryad, which only includes protein orthologs in building a multiple sequence alignment. Among many other innovations, SNPdryad uses different conservation scoring schemes and uses Random Forest as a classifier. We have tested SNPdryad on several datasets. We found that SNPdryad consistently outperformed other methods in several performance metrics, which is attributed to the exclusion of paralogous sequence. We have run SNPdryad on the complete human proteome, generating prediction scores for all the possible amino acid substitutions.
The algorithm and the prediction results can be accessed from the Web site: http://snps.ccbr.utoronto.ca:8080/SNPdryad/.

Single nucleotide variants represent a prevalent form of genetic variation. Mutations in the coding regions are frequently associated with the development of various genetic diseases. Computational tools for the prediction of the effects of mutations on protein function are very important for analysis of single nucleotide variants and their prioritization for experimental characterization. Many computational tools are already widely employed for this purpose. Unfortunately, their comparison and further improvement is hindered by large overlaps between the training datasets and benchmark datasets, which lead to biased and overly optimistic reported performances. In this study, we have constructed three independent datasets by removing all duplicities, inconsistencies and mutations previously used in the training of evaluated tools. The benchmark dataset containing over 43,000 mutations was employed for the unbiased evaluation of eight established prediction tools: MAPP, nsSNPAnalyzer, PANTHER, PhD-SNP, PolyPhen-1, PolyPhen-2, SIFT and SNAP. The six best performing tools were combined into a consensus classifier PredictSNP, resulting into significantly improved prediction performance, and at the same time returned results for all mutations, confirming that consensus prediction represents an accurate and robust alternative to the predictions delivered by individual tools. A user-friendly web interface enables easy access to all eight prediction tools, the consensus classifier PredictSNP and annotations from the Protein Mutant Database and the UniProt database. The web server and the datasets are freely available to the academic community at http://loschmidt.chemi.muni.cz/predictsnp.

Protein kinases are involved in relevant physiological functions and a broad number of mutations in this superfamily have been reported in the literature to affect protein function and stability. Unfortunately, the exploration of the consequences on the phenotypes of each individual mutation remains a considerable challenge.
The wKinMut web-server offers direct prediction of the potential pathogenicity of the mutations from a number of methods, including our recently developed prediction method based on the combination of information from a range of diverse sources, including physicochemical properties and functional annotations from FireDB and Swissprot and kinase-specific characteristics such as the membership to specific kinase groups, the annotation with disease-associated GO terms or the occurrence of the mutation in PFAM domains, and the relevance of the residues in determining kinase subfamily specificity from S3Det. This predictor yields interesting results that compare favourably with other methods in the field when applied to protein kinases.
Together with the predictions, wKinMut offers a number of integrated services for the analysis of mutations. These include: the classification of the kinase, information about associations of the kinase with other proteins extracted from iHop, the mapping of the mutations onto PDB structures, pathogenicity records from a number of databases and the classification of mutations in large-scale cancer studies. Importantly, wKinMut is connected with the SNP2L system that extracts mentions of mutations directly from the literature, and therefore increases the possibilities of finding interesting functional information associated to the studied mutations.
wKinMut facilitates the exploration of the information available about individual mutations by integrating prediction approaches with the automatic extraction of information from the literature (text mining) and several state-of-the-art databases.
wKinMut has been used during the last year for the analysis of the consequences of mutations in the context of a number of cancer genome projects, including the recent analysis of Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia cases and is publicly available at http://wkinmut.bioinfo.cnio.es.

QualitySNPng is a new software tool for the detection and interactive visualization of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). It uses a haplotype-based strategy to identify reliable SNPs; it is optimized for the analysis of current RNA-seq data; but it can also be used on genomic DNA sequences derived from next-generation sequencing experiments. QualitySNPng does not require a sequenced reference genome and delivers reliable SNPs for di- as well as polyploid species. The tool features a user-friendly interface, multiple filtering options to handle typical sequencing errors, support for SAM and ACE files and interactive visualization. QualitySNPng produces high-quality SNP information that can be used directly in genotyping by sequencing approaches for application in QTL and genome-wide association mapping as well as to populate SNP arrays. The software can be used as a stand-alone application with a graphical user interface or as part of a pipeline system like Galaxy. Versions for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux, as well as the source code, are available from http://www.bioinformatics.nl/QualitySNPng.

In recent years the number of human genetic variants deposited into the publicly available databases has been increasing exponentially. The latest version of dbSNP, for example, contains ~50 million validated Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs). SNVs make up most of human variation and are often the primary causes of disease. The non-synonymous SNVs (nsSNVs) result in single amino acid substitutions and may affect protein function, often causing disease. Although several methods for the detection of nsSNV effects have already been developed, the consistent increase in annotated data is offering the opportunity to improve prediction accuracy.
Here we present a new approach for the detection of disease-associated nsSNVs (Meta-SNP) that integrates four existing methods: PANTHER, PhD-SNP, SIFT and SNAP. We first tested the accuracy of each method using a dataset of 35,766 disease-annotated mutations from 8,667 proteins extracted from the SwissVar database. The four methods reached overall accuracies of 64%-76% with a Matthew's correlation coefficient (MCC) of 0.38-0.53. We then used the outputs of these methods to develop a machine learning based approach that discriminates between disease-associated and polymorphic variants (Meta-SNP). In testing, the combined method reached 79% overall accuracy and 0.59 MCC, ~3% higher accuracy and ~0.05 higher correlation with respect to the best-performing method. Moreover, for the hardest-to-define subset of nsSNVs, i.e. variants for which half of the predictors disagreed with the other half, Meta-SNP attained 8% higher accuracy than the best predictor.
Here we find that the Meta-SNP algorithm achieves better performance than the best single predictor. This result suggests that the methods used for the prediction of variant-disease associations are orthogonal, encoding different biologically relevant relationships. Careful combination of predictions from various resources is therefore a good strategy for the selection of high reliability predictions. Indeed, for the subset of nsSNVs where all predictors were in agreement (46% of all nsSNVs in the set), our method reached 87% overall accuracy and 0.73 MCC. Meta-SNP server is freely accessible at http://snps.biofold.org/meta-snp.

SNPs&GO is a method for the prediction of deleterious Single Amino acid Polymorphisms (SAPs) using protein functional annotation. In this work, we present the web server implementation of SNPs&GO (WS-SNPs&GO). The server is based on Support Vector Machines (SVM) and for a given protein, its input comprises: the sequence and/or its three-dimensional structure (when available), a set of target variations and its functional Gene Ontology (GO) terms. The output of the server provides, for each protein variation, the probabilities to be associated to human diseases.
The server consists of two main components, including updated versions of the sequence-based SNPs&GO (recently scored as one of the best algorithms for predicting deleterious SAPs) and of the structure-based SNPs&GO3d programs. Sequence and structure based algorithms are extensively tested on a large set of annotated variations extracted from the SwissVar database. Selecting a balanced dataset with more than 38,000 SAPs, the sequence-based approach achieves 81% overall accuracy, 0.61 correlation coefficient and an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.88. For the subset of ~6,600 variations mapped on protein structures available at the Protein Data Bank (PDB), the structure-based method scores with 84% overall accuracy, 0.68 correlation coefficient, and 0.91 AUC. When tested on a new blind set of variations, the results of the server are 79% and 83% overall accuracy for the sequence-based and structure-based inputs, respectively.
WS-SNPs&GO is a valuable tool that includes in a unique framework information derived from protein sequence, structure, evolutionary profile, and protein function. WS-SNPs&GO is freely available at http://snps.biofold.org/snps-and-go.

Cancer therapies are limited by the development of drug resistance and mutations in drug targets is one of the main reasons for developing acquired resistance. The adequate knowledge of these mutations in drug targets would help to design effective personalized therapies. Keeping this in mind, we have developed a database “CancerDR”, which provides information of 148 anti-cancer drugs and their pharmacological profiling across 952 cancer cell lines. CancerDR provides comprehensive information about each drug target that includes; (i) sequence of natural variants, (ii) mutations, (iii) tertiary structure and (iv) alignment profile of mutants/variants. A number of web-based tools have been integrated in CancerDR. This database will be very useful for identification of genetic alterations in genes encoding drug targets and in turn the residues responsible for drug resistance. CancerDR allows user to identify promiscuous drug molecules that can kill wide range of cancer cells. CancerDR is freely accessible at http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/cancerdr/

SNPedia (http://www.SNPedia.com) is a wiki resource of the functional consequences of human genetic variation as published in peer-reviewed studies. Online since 2006 and freely available for personal use, SNPedia has focused on the medical, phenotypic and genealogical associations of single nucleotide polymorphisms. Entries are formatted to allow associations to be assigned to single genotypes as well as sets of genotypes (genosets). In this article, we discuss the growth of this resource and its use by affiliated software to create personal genome reports.

CREDO is a unique relational database storing all pairwise atomic interactions of inter- as well as intra-molecular contacts between small molecules and macromolecules found in experimentally determined structures from the Protein Data Bank. These interactions are integrated with further chemical and biological data. The database implements useful data structures and algorithms such as cheminformatics routines to create a comprehensive analysis platform for drug discovery. The database can be accessed through a web-based interface, downloads of data sets and web services at http://www-cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/credo.

With the advent of Next Generation Sequencing the identification of mutations in the genomes of healthy and diseased tissues has become commonplace. While much progress has been made to elucidate the aetiology of disease processes in cancer, the contributions to disease that many individual mutations make remain to be characterised and their downstream consequences on cancer phenotypes remain to be understood. Missense mutations commonly occur in cancers and their consequences remain challenging to predict. However, this knowledge is becoming more vital, for both assessing disease progression and for stratifying drug treatment regimes. Coupled with structural data, comprehensive genomic databases of mutations such as the 1000 Genomes project and COSMIC give an opportunity to investigate general principles of how cancer mutations disrupt proteins and their interactions at the molecular and network level. We describe a comprehensive comparison of cancer and neutral missense mutations; by combining features derived from structural and interface properties we have developed a carcinogenicity predictor, InCa (Index of Carcinogenicity). Upon comparison with other methods, we observe that InCa can predict mutations that might not be detected by other methods. We also discuss general limitations shared by all predictors that attempt to predict driver mutations and discuss how this could impact high-throughput predictions. A web interface to a server implementation is publicly available at http://inca.icr.ac.uk/.

The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recently released guidelines regarding the reporting of incidental findings in sequencing data. Given the availability of Direct to Consumer (DTC) genetic testing and the falling cost of whole exome and genome sequencing, individuals will increasingly have the opportunity to analyze their own genomic data. We have developed a web-based tool, PATH-SCAN, which annotates individual genomes and exomes for ClinVar designated pathogenic variants found within the genes from the ACMG guidelines. Because mutations in these genes predispose individuals to conditions with actionable outcomes, our tool will allow individuals or researchers to identify potential risk variants in order to consult physicians or genetic counselors for further evaluation. Moreover, our tool allows individuals to anonymously submit their pathogenic burden, so that we can crowd source the collection of quantitative information regarding the frequency of these variants. We tested our tool on 1092 publicly available genomes from the 1000 Genomes project, 163 genomes from the Personal Genome Project, and 15 genomes from a clinical genome sequencing research project. Excluding the most commonly seen variant in 1000 Genomes, about 20% of all genomes analyzed had a ClinVar designated pathogenic variant that required further evaluation.

The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) project, available at http://www.human-phenotype-ontology.org, provides a structured, comprehensive and well-defined set of 10,088 classes (terms) describing human phenotypic abnormalities and 13,326 subclass relations between the HPO classes. In addition we have developed logical definitions for 46% of all HPO classes using terms from ontologies for anatomy, cell types, function, embryology, pathology and other domains. This allows interoperability with several resources, especially those containing phenotype information on model organisms such as mouse and zebrafish. Here we describe the updated HPO database, which provides annotations of 7,278 human hereditary syndromes listed in OMIM, Orphanet and DECIPHER to classes of the HPO. Various meta-attributes such as frequency, references and negations are associated with each annotation. Several large-scale projects worldwide utilize the HPO for describing phenotype information in their datasets. We have therefore generated equivalence mappings to other phenotype vocabularies such as LDDB, Orphanet, MedDRA, UMLS and phenoDB, allowing integration of existing datasets and interoperability with multiple biomedical resources. We have created various ways to access the HPO database content using flat files, a MySQL database, and Web-based tools. All data and documentation on the HPO project can be found online.

Over the past decade, the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV; http://dgv.tcag.ca/) has provided a publicly accessible, comprehensive curated catalogue of structural variation (SV) found in the genomes of control individuals from worldwide populations. Here, we describe updates and new features, which have expanded the utility of DGV for both the basic research and clinical diagnostic communities. The current version of DGV consists of 55 published studies, comprising >2.5 million entries identified in >22 300 genomes. Studies included in DGV are selected from the accessioned data sets in the archival SV databases dbVar (NCBI) and DGVa (EBI), and then further curated for accuracy and validity. The core visualization tool (gbrowse) has been upgraded with additional functions to facilitate data analysis and comparison, and a new query tool has been developed to provide flexible and interactive access to the data. The content from DGV is regularly incorporated into other large-scale genome reference databases and represents a standard data resource for new product and database development, in particular for copy number variation testing in clinical labs. The accurate cataloguing of variants in DGV will continue to enable medical genetics and genome sequencing research.

The DECIPHER database (https://decipher.sanger.ac.uk/) is an accessible online repository of genetic variation with associated phenotypes that facilitates the identification and interpretation of pathogenic genetic variation in patients with rare disorders. Contributing to DECIPHER is an international consortium of >200 academic clinical centres of genetic medicine and ≥1600 clinical geneticists and diagnostic laboratory scientists. Information integrated from a variety of bioinformatics resources, coupled with visualization tools, provides a comprehensive set of tools to identify other patients with similar genotype–phenotype characteristics and highlights potentially pathogenic genes. In a significant development, we have extended DECIPHER from a database of just copy-number variants to allow upload, annotation and analysis of sequence variants such as single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and InDels. Other notable developments in DECIPHER include a purpose-built, customizable and interactive genome browser to aid combined visualization and interpretation of sequence and copy-number variation against informative datasets of pathogenic and population variation. We have also introduced several new features to our deposition and analysis interface. This article provides an update to the DECIPHER database, an earlier instance of which has been described elsewhere [Swaminathan et al. (2012) DECIPHER: web-based, community resource for clinical interpretation of rare variants in developmental disorders. Hum. Mol. Genet., 21, R37–R44].

The Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGap, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap) is a National Institutes of Health-sponsored repository charged to archive, curate and distribute information produced by studies investigating the interaction of genotype and phenotype. Information in dbGaP is organized as a hierarchical structure and includes the accessioned objects, phenotypes (as variables and datasets), various molecular assay data (SNP and Expression Array data, Sequence and Epigenomic marks), analyses and documents. Publicly accessible metadata about submitted studies, summary level data, and documents related to studies can be accessed freely on the dbGaP website. Individual-level data are accessible via Controlled Access application to scientists across the globe.

ClinVar (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/) provides a freely available archive of reports of relationships among medically important variants and phenotypes. ClinVar accessions submissions reporting human variation, interpretations of the relationship of that variation to human health and the evidence supporting each interpretation. The database is tightly coupled with dbSNP and dbVar, which maintain information about the location of variation on human assemblies. ClinVar is also based on the phenotypic descriptions maintained in MedGen (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/medgen). Each ClinVar record represents the submitter, the variation and the phenotype, i.e. the unit that is assigned an accession of the format SCV000000000.0. The submitter can update the submission at any time, in which case a new version is assigned. To facilitate evaluation of the medical importance of each variant, ClinVar aggregates submissions with the same variation/phenotype combination, adds value from other NCBI databases, assigns a distinct accession of the format RCV000000000.0 and reports if there are conflicting clinical interpretations. Data in ClinVar are available in multiple formats, including html, download as XML, VCF or tab-delimited subsets. Data from ClinVar are provided as annotation tracks on genomic RefSeqs and are used in tools such as Variation Reporter (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/variation/tools/reporter), which reports what is known about variation based on user-supplied locations.

There has been a rapid increase in the amount of mutational data due to, amongst other things, an increase in single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data and the use of site-directed mutagenesis as a tool to help dissect out functional properties of proteins. Many manually curated databases have been developed to index point mutations but they are not sustainable with the ever-increasing volume of scientific literature. There have been considerable efforts in the automatic extraction of mutation specific information from raw text involving use of various text-mining approaches. However, one of the key problems is to link these mutations with its associated protein and to present this data in such a way that researchers can immediately contextualize it within a structurally related family of proteins. To aid this process, we have developed an application called MutationMapper. Point mutations are extracted from abstracts and are validated against protein sequences in Uniprot as far as possible. Our methodology differs in a fundamental way from the usual text-mining approach. Rather than start with abstracts, we start with protein sequences, which facilitates greatly the process of validating a potential point mutation identified in an abstract. The results are displayed as mutations mapped on to the protein sequence or a multiple sequence alignment. The latter enables one to readily pick up mutations performed at equivalent positions in related proteins. We demonstrate the use of MutationMapper against several examples including a single sequence and multiple sequence alignments. The application is available as a web-service at http://mutationmapper.bioch.ox.ac.uk.

The sheer volume of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms that have been generated in recent years from projects such as the Human Genome Project, the HapMap Project and Genome-Wide Association Studies means that it is not possible to characterize all mutations experimentally on the gene products, i.e. elucidate the effects of mutations on protein structure and function. However, automatic methods that can predict the effects of mutations will allow a reduced set of mutations to be studied. Site Directed Mutator (SDM) is a statistical potential energy function that uses environment-specific amino-acid substitution frequencies within homologous protein families to calculate a stability score, which is analogous to the free energy difference between the wild-type and mutant protein. Here, we present a web server for SDM ( http://www-cryst.bioc.cam.ac.uk/~sdm/sdm.php ), which has obtained more than 10 000 submissions since being online in April 2008. To run SDM, users must upload a wild-type structure and the position and amino acid type of the mutation. The results returned include information about the local structural environment of the wild-type and mutant residues, a stability score prediction and prediction of disease association. Additionally, the wild-type and mutant structures are displayed in a Jmol applet with the relevant residues highlighted.

The RosettaBackrub server (http://kortemmelab.ucsf.edu/backrub) implements the Backrub method, derived from observations of alternative conformations in high-resolution protein crystal structures, for flexible backbone protein modeling. Backrub modeling is applied to three related applications using the Rosetta program for structure prediction and design: (I) modeling of structures of point mutations, (II) generating protein conformational ensembles and designing sequences consistent with these conformations and (III) predicting tolerated sequences at protein–protein interfaces. The three protocols have been validated on experimental data. Starting from a user-provided single input protein structure in PDB format, the server generates near-native conformational ensembles. The predicted conformations and sequences can be used for different applications, such as to guide mutagenesis experiments, for ensemble-docking approaches or to generate sequence libraries for protein design.

The discovery of mutations in cancer genes has advanced our understanding of cancer. These results are dispersed across the scientific literature and with the availability of the human genome sequence will continue to accrue. The COSMIC (Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer) database and website have been developed to store somatic mutation data in a single location and display the data and other information related to human cancer. To populate this resource, data has currently been extracted from reports in the scientific literature for somatic mutations in four genes, BRAF, HRAS, KRAS2 and NRAS. At present, the database holds information on 66 634 samples and reports a total of 10 647 mutations. Through the web pages, these data can be queried, displayed as figures or tables and exported in a number of formats. COSMIC is an ongoing project that will continue to curate somatic mutation data and release it through the website.

Much has changed in the last two years at DGVa (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/dgva) and dbVar (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbvar). We are now processing direct submissions rather than only curating data from the literature and our joint study catalog includes data from over 100 studies in 11 organisms. Studies from human dominate with data from control and case populations, tumor samples as well as three large curated studies derived from multiple sources. During the processing of these data, we have made improvements to our data model, submission process and data representation. Additionally, we have made significant improvements in providing access to these data via web and FTP interfaces.

The current state of the art in medical genetics is to identify and classify the functional (deleterious) or non-functional (neutral) single amino acid substitutions (SAPs), also known as non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs). The primary goal is to elucidate the mechanisms through which functional SAPs exert their effects, and ultimately interrogating this information for association with complex phenotypes. This work focuses on coagulation factors involved in the coagulation cascade pathway which plays a vital role in the maintenance of homeostasis in the human system. We developed an integrated coagulation variation database, CoagVDb, which makes use of the biological information from various public databases such as NCBI, OMIM, UniProt, PDB and SAPs (rsIDs/variant). CoagVDb enriched with computational prediction scores classify SAPs as either deleterious or tolerated. Also, various other properties are incorporated such as amino acid composition, secondary structure elements, solvent accessibility, ordered/disordered regions, conservation, and the presence of disulfide bonds. This specialized database provides integration of various prediction scores from different computational methods along with gene, protein, and disease information. We hope our database will act as a useful reference resource for hematologists to reveal protein structure-function relationship and disease genotype-phenotype correlation.

The function of many non-coding RNA genes and cis-regulatory elements of messenger RNA largely depends on the structure, which is in turn determined by their sequence. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and other mutations may disrupt the RNA structure, interfere with the molecular function and hence cause a phenotypic effect. RNAsnp is an efficient method to predict the effect of SNPs on local RNA secondary structure based on the RNA folding algorithms implemented in the Vienna RNA package. The SNP effects are quantified in terms of empirical P-values, which, for computational efficiency, are derived from extensive pre-computed tables of distributions of substitution effects as a function of gene length and GC content. Here, we present a web service that not only provides an interface for RNAsnp but also features a graphical output representation. In addition, the web server is connected to a local mirror of the UCSC genome browser database that enables the users to select the genomic sequences for analysis and visualize the results directly in the UCSC genome browser. The RNAsnp web server is freely available at: http://rth.dk/resources/rnasnp/.

Daily, mutability and recombination of RNA viruses result in the production of million variants. All these rapid genomic changes directly influence the functional sites of the protein, its 3D structure or its drug resistances. Therefore, it is important to simulate these drastic switches to determine their effects on virus populations. Many computer programs are able to simulate specific variations in DNA genomes, but are generally non-adapted to RNA viruses. They simulate site-specific selection pressures, but rarely pressures on covariant or on higher order correlated sites and no at all on synthetic lethal groups. That is why we felt it important to create VIRAPOPS, a forward simulator that models specific RNA virus functions. It was designed for computational biologists, biologists and virologists.
Free binaries are available through a software repository at http://petitjeanmichel.free.fr/itoweb.petitjean.freeware.html.

Biological events such as gene expression, regulation, phosphorylation, localization and protein catabolism play important roles in the development of diseases. Understanding the association between diseases and genes can be enhanced with the identification of involved biological events in this association. Although biological knowledge has been accumulated in several databases and can be accessed through the Web, there is no specialized Web tool yet allowing for a query into the relationship among diseases, genes and biological events. For this task, we developed DigSee to search MEDLINE abstracts for evidence sentences describing that ‘genes’ are involved in the development of ‘cancer’ through ‘biological events’. DigSee is available through http://gcancer.org/digsee.

Identifying which mutation(s) within a given genotype is responsible for an observable phenotype is important in many aspects of molecular biology. Here, we present SigniSite, an online application for subgroup-free residue-level genotype–phenotype correlation. In contrast to similar methods, SigniSite does not require any pre-definition of subgroups or binary classification. Input is a set of protein sequences where each sequence has an associated real number, quantifying a given phenotype. SigniSite will then identify which amino acid residues are significantly associated with the data set phenotype. As output, SigniSite displays a sequence logo, depicting the strength of the phenotype association of each residue and a heat-map identifying ‘hot’ or ‘cold’ regions. SigniSite was benchmarked against SPEER, a state-of-the-art method for the prediction of specificity determining positions (SDP) using a set of human immunodeficiency virus protease-inhibitor genotype–phenotype data and corresponding resistance mutation scores from the Stanford University HIV Drug Resistance Database, and a data set of protein families with experimentally annotated SDPs. For both data sets, SigniSite was found to outperform SPEER. SigniSite is available at: http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SigniSite/.

Mutation of a single amino acid residue can cause changes in a protein, which could then lead to a loss of protein function. Predicting the protein stability changes can provide several possible candidates for the novel protein designing. Although many prediction tools are available, the conflicting prediction results from different tools could cause confusion to users.
We proposed an integrated predictor, iStable, with grid computing architecture constructed by using sequence information and prediction results from different element predictors. In the learning model, several machine learning methods were evaluated and adopted the support vector machine as an integrator, while not just choosing the majority answer given by element predictors. Furthermore, the role of the sequence information played was analyzed in our model, and an 11-window size was determined. On the other hand, iStable is available with two different input types: structural and sequential. After training and cross-validation, iStable has better performance than all of the element predictors on several datasets. Under different classifications and conditions for validation, this study has also shown better overall performance in different types of secondary structures, relative solvent accessibility circumstances, protein memberships in different superfamilies, and experimental conditions.
The trained and validated version of iStable provides an accurate approach for prediction of protein stability changes. iStable is freely available online at: http://predictor.nchu.edu.tw/iStable.

The ability of proteins to establish highly selective interactions with a variety of (macro)molecular partners is a crucial prerequisite to the realization of their biological functions. The availability of computational tools to evaluate the impact of mutations on protein–protein binding can therefore be valuable in a wide range of industrial and biomedical applications, and help rationalize the consequences of non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms. BeAtMuSiC (http://babylone.ulb.ac.be/beatmusic) is a coarse-grained predictor of the changes in binding free energy induced by point mutations. It relies on a set of statistical potentials derived from known protein structures, and combines the effect of the mutation on the strength of the interactions at the interface, and on the overall stability of the complex. The BeAtMuSiC server requires as input the structure of the protein–protein complex, and gives the possibility to assess rapidly all possible mutations in a protein chain or at the interface, with predictive performances that are in line with the best current methodologies.

The ability of proteins to establish highly selective interactions with a variety of (macro)molecular partners is a crucial prerequisite to the realization of their biological functions. The availability of computational tools to evaluate the impact of mutations on protein-protein binding can therefore be valuable in a wide range of industrial and biomedical applications, and help rationalize the consequences of non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms. BeAtMuSiC (http://babylone.ulb.ac.be/beatmusic) is a coarse-grained predictor of the changes in binding free energy induced by point mutations. It relies on a set of statistical potentials derived from known protein structures, and combines the effect of the mutation on the strength of the interactions at the interface, and on the overall stability of the complex. The BeAtMuSiC server requires as input the structure of the protein-protein complex, and gives the possibility to assess rapidly all possible mutations in a protein chain or at the interface, with predictive performances that are in line with the best current methodologies.

The identification of thousands of mutations yearly has put new challenges to researchers who are interested in fast and effective annotation as well as the prediction of potential implications to the gene regulation mechanisms. This work presents an integrative tool, called GREMET, for the prediction of alterations in gene splicing regulation inferred by mutations of the human genome. GREMET supports the characterization of mutations either single-point or indels with respect to their effect on the splicing potential of the neighboring sequences and the binding strength of auxiliary cis-acting splicing enhancers. In addition, GREMET identifies possible consequences of mutations on the DNA methylation through the disruption or creation of CpG sequences. Besides locus-specific mutations, GREMET performs the analyses on newly identified mutations and provides an easy-to-use Web interface helping researchers to save time in routine mutation analyses. GREMET is freely accessible at: http://kedip.med.auth.gr/biotools/gremet/.

Genome-wide association studies and re-sequencing projects are revealing an increasing number of disease-associated SNPs, a large fraction of which are non-coding. Although they could have relevance for disease susceptibility and progression, the lack of information about regulatory regions impedes the assessment of their functionality. Here we present a web server, ChroMoS (Chromatin Modified SNPs), which combines genetic and epigenetic data with the goal of facilitating SNPs' classification, prioritization and prediction of their functional consequences. ChroMoS uses a large database of SNPs and chromatin states, but allows a user to provide his/her own genetic information. Based on the SNP classification and interactive prioritization, a user can compute the functional impact of multiple SNPs using two prediction tools, one for differential analysis of transcription factor binding (sTRAP) and another for SNPs with potential impact on binding of miRNAs (MicroSNiPer).
Web server, ChroMoS, is freely available at http://epicenter.immunbio.mpg.de/services/chromos.

Utilizing the user-supplied coordinates of a protein structure, the COREX/BEST Server generates a structural thermodynamic ensemble. This conformational ensemble can then be used to calculate the regional variations in stability of a protein structure, and the stabilities are presented in units of energy (kcal/mol). The regional stabilities, which are calculated at the resolution of individual residues, can be mapped onto the protein structure for visual representation and downloaded from the site in the form of tab delimited text. The site provides an easy to follow summary of the theoretical and algorithmic approaches and provides links to references for more detailed descriptions.
The COREX/BEST Server may be accessed through a typical web browser by visiting http://best.utmb.edu/BEST/

High-throughput sequencing data generation demands the development of methods for interpreting the effects of genomic variants. Numerous computational methods have been developed to assess the impact of variations because experimental methods are unable to cope with both the speed and volume of data generation. To harness the strength of currently available predictors, the Pathogenic-or-Not-Pipeline (PON-P) integrates five predictors to predict the probability that nonsynonymous variations affect protein function and may consequently be disease related. Random forest methodology-based PON-P shows consistently improved performance in cross-validation tests and on independent test sets, providing ternary classification and statistical reliability estimate of results. Applied to missense variants in a melanoma cancer cell line, PON-P predicts variants in 17 genes to affect protein function. Previous studies implicate nine of these genes in the pathogenesis of various forms of cancer. PON-P may thus be used as a first step in screening and prioritizing variants to determine deleterious ones for further experimentation. Hum Mutat 33:1166–1174, 2012. © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Several computational methods have been developed for predicting the effects of rapidly expanding variation data. Comparison of the performance of tools has been very difficult as the methods have been trained and tested with different datasets. Until now, unbiased and representative benchmark datasets have been missing. We have developed a benchmark database suite, VariBench, to overcome this problem. VariBench contains datasets of experimentally verified high-quality variation data carefully chosen from literature and relevant databases. It provides the mapping of variation position to different levels (protein, RNA and DNA sequences, protein three-dimensional structure), along with identifier mapping to relevant databases. VariBench contains the first benchmark datasets for variation effect analysis, a field which is of high importance and where many developments are currently going on. VariBench datasets can be used, for example, to test performance of prediction tools as well as to train novel machine learning-based tools. New datasets will be included and the community is encouraged to submit high-quality datasets to the service. VariBench is freely available at http://structure.bmc.lu.se/VariBench.

Since the cooperative mechanism between interconnected residues plays a critical role in protein functions, the detection of coevolving residues is important for studying various biological functions of proteins. In this work, we developed a new correlated mutation analysis method that shows substantially better prediction accuracy than all other methods. More importantly, the prediction accuracy of our new method is insensitive to the characteristics of the multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) from which the correlated mutation scores are calculated. Thanks to this desirable property, not only it does it show a good performance even for MSAs automatically generated by sequence homology methodologies, which allows us to build a fully automatic easy-to-use server named CMAT, but its performance is also consistently high on the columns of MSAs containing a high fraction of gaps, which greatly extends the applicability of the correlated mutation analysis. The key development of this work is the joint probability estimation that can be greatly improved by utilizing sequence profile as prior knowledge, which is shown to be highly beneficial to the correlated mutation analysis and its applications. From the computational perspective, we made two important findings; the sequence profile can be used to estimate the pseudocounts, and the consistency rule on joint probabilities and marginal probabilities is important for accurately estimating the joint probability. The web server and standalone program are freely available on the web at http://binfolab12.kaist.ac.kr/cmat/.

Utilizing cutting-edge supervised classification and regression algorithms, three web-based tools have been developed for predicting stability changes upon single residue substitutions in proteins with known native structures. Trained models classify independent mutant test sets with accuracies ranging from 87 to 94%. Attributes representing each mutant protein are based on a computational mutagenesis methodology relying on a four-body statistical potential, illustrating a novel integration of both energy-based and machine learning approaches. The servers are written in PHP and hosted on a Linux platform, and they can be freely accessed online along with detailed data sets, documentation and performance results at http://proteins.gmu.edu/automute.

Predicting the effects of amino acid substitutions on protein stability provides invaluable information for protein design, the assignment of biological function, and for understanding disease-associated variations. To understand the effects of substitutions, computational models are preferred to time-consuming and expensive experimental methods. Several methods have been proposed for this task including machine learning-based approaches. However, models trained using limited data have performance problems and many model parameters tend to be over-fitted. To decrease the number of model parameters and to improve the generalization potential, we calculated the amino acid contact energy change for point variations using a structure-based coarse-grained model. Based on the structural properties including contact energy (CE) and further physicochemical properties of the amino acids as input features, we developed two support vector machine classifiers. M47 predicted the stability of variant proteins with an accuracy of 87 % and a Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.68 for a large dataset of 1925 variants, whereas M8 performed better when a relatively small dataset of 388 variants was used for 20-fold cross-validation. The performance of the M47 classifier on all six tested contingency table evaluation parameters is better than that of existing machine learning-based models or energy function-based protein stability classifiers.

I-Mutant2.0 is a support vector machine (SVM)-based tool for the automatic prediction of protein stability changes upon single point mutations. I-Mutant2.0 predictions are performed starting either from the protein structure or, more importantly, from the protein sequence. This latter task, to the best of our knowledge, is exploited for the first time. The method was trained and tested on a data set derived from ProTherm, which is presently the most comprehensive available database of thermodynamic experimental data of free energy changes of protein stability upon mutation under different conditions. I-Mutant2.0 can be used both as a classifier for predicting the sign of the protein stability change upon mutation and as a regression estimator for predicting the related ΔΔ G values. Acting as a classifier, I-Mutant2.0 correctly predicts (with a cross-validation procedure) 80% or 77% of the data set, depending on the usage of structural or sequence information, respectively. When predicting ΔΔ G values associated with mutations, the correlation of predicted with expected/experimental values is 0.71 (with a standard error of 1.30 kcal/mol) and 0.62 (with a standard error of 1.45 kcal/mol) when structural or sequence information are respectively adopted. Our web interface allows the selection of a predictive mode that depends on the availability of the protein structure and/or sequence. In this latter case, the web server requires only pasting of a protein sequence in a raw format. We therefore introduce I-Mutant2.0 as a unique and valuable helper for protein design, even when the protein structure is not yet known with atomic resolution. Availability: http://gpcr.biocomp.unibo.it/cgi/predictors/I-Mutant2.0/I-Mutant2.0.cgi .

Residues expected to play key roles in the stabilization of proteins [stabilizing residues (SRs)] are selected by combining several methods based mainly on the interactions of a given residue with its spatial, rather than its sequential neighborhood and by considering the evolutionary conservation of the residues. A residue is selected as a stabilizing residue if it has high surrounding hydrophobicity, high long-range order, high conservation score and if it belongs to a stabilization center. The definition of all these parameters and the thresholds used to identify the SRs are discussed in detail. The algorithm for identifying SRs was originally developed for TIM-barrel proteins [M. M. Gromiha, G. Pujadas, C. Magyar, S. Selvaraj, and I. Simon (2004), Proteins, 55, 316–329] and is now generalized for all proteins of known 3D structure. SRs could be applied in protein engineering and homology modeling and could also help to explain certain folds with significant stability. The SRide server is located at http://sride.enzim.hu .

Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and mutations have been associated with human phenotypes and disease. As more and more SNPs are mapped to phenotypes, understanding how these variations affect the function and expression of genes and gene products becomes an important endeavor. We have developed a set of tools to aid in the understanding of how amino acid substitutions affect protein structures. To do this, we have annotated SNPs in dbSNP and amino acid substitutions in Swiss-Prot with protein structural information, if available. We then developed a novel web interface to this data that allows for visualization of the location of these substitutions. We have also developed a web service interface to the dataset and developed interactive plugins for UCSF's Chimera structural modeling tool and PyMOL that integrate our annotations with these sophisticated structural visualization and modeling tools. The web services portal and plugins can be downloaded from http://www.lifescienceweb.org/ and the web interface is at http://www.mutdb.org/ .

We have developed a computer algorithm, FOLDEF (for FOLD-X energy function), to provide a fast and quantitative estimation of the importance of the interactions contributing to the stability of proteins and protein complexes. The predictive power of FOLDEF was tested on a very large set of point mutants (1088 mutants) spanning most of the structural environments found in proteins. FOLDEF uses a full atomic description of the structure of the proteins. The different energy terms taken into account in FOLDEF have been weighted using empirical data obtained from protein engineering experiments. First, we considered a training database of 339 mutants in nine different proteins and optimised the set of parameters and weighting factors that best accounted for the changes in stability of the mutants. The predictive power of the method was then tested using a blind test mutant database of 667 mutants, as well as a database of 82 protein–protein complex mutants. The global correlation obtained for 95 % of the entire mutant database (1030 mutants) is 0.83 with a standard deviation of 0.81 kcal mol−1 and a slope of 0.76. The present energy function uses a minimum of computational resources and can therefore easily be used in protein design algorithms, and in the field of protein structure and folding pathways prediction where one requires a fast and accurate energy function. FOLDEF is available via a web-interface at http://fold-x.embl-heidelberg.de

We have developed a statistical mechanics algorithm, TANGO, to predict protein aggregation. TANGO is based on the physico-chemical principles of β-sheet formation, extended by the assumption that the core regions of an aggregate are fully buried. Our algorithm accurately predicts the aggregation of a data set of 179 peptides compiled from the literature as well as of a new set of 71 peptides derived from human disease-related proteins, including prion protein, lysozyme and β2-microglobulin. TANGO also correctly predicts pathogenic as well as protective mutations of the Alzheimer β-peptide, human lysozyme and transthyretin, and discriminates between β-sheet propensity and aggregation. Our results confirm the model of intermolecular β-sheet formation as a widespread underlying mechanism of protein aggregation. Furthermore, the algorithm opens the door to a fully automated, sequence-based design strategy to improve the aggregation properties of proteins of scientific or industrial interest.

The Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant (SIFT) algorithm predicts the effect of coding variants on protein function. It was first introduced in 2001, with a corresponding website that provides users with predictions on their variants. Since its release, SIFT has become one of the standard tools for characterizing missense variation. We have updated SIFT’s genome-wide prediction tool since our last publication in 2009, and added new features to the insertion/deletion (indel) tool. We also show accuracy metrics on independent data sets. The original developers have hosted the SIFT web server at FHCRC, JCVI and the web server is currently located at BII. The URL is http://sift-dna.org (24 May 2012, date last accessed).

The effect of genetic mutation on phenotype is of significant interest in genetics. The type of genetic mutation that causes a single amino acid substitution (AAS) in a protein sequence is called a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism (nsSNP). An nsSNP could potentially affect the function of the protein, subsequently altering the carrier's phenotype. This protocol describes the use of the 'Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant' (SIFT) algorithm in predicting whether an AAS affects protein function. To assess the effect of a substitution, SIFT assumes that important positions in a protein sequence have been conserved throughout evolution and therefore substitutions at these positions may affect protein function. Thus, by using sequence homology, SIFT predicts the effects of all possible substitutions at each position in the protein sequence. The protocol typically takes 5–20 min, depending on the input. SIFT is available as an online tool (http://sift-dna.org).

Human genetic variations primarily result from single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that occur approximately every 1000 bases in the overall human population. The non-synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) that lead to amino acid changes in the protein product may account for nearly half of the known genetic variations linked to inherited human diseases. One of the key problems of medical genetics today is to identify nsSNPs that underlie disease-related phenotypes in humans. As such, the development of computational tools that can identify such nsSNPs would enhance our understanding of genetic diseases and help predict the disease.
We propose a method, named Parepro (P redicting the a mino acid re placement pro bability), to identify nsSNPs having either deleterious or neutral effects on the resulting protein function. Two independent datasets, HumVar and NewHumVar, taken from the PhD-SNP server, were applied to train the model and test the robustness of Parepro. Using a 20-fold cross validation test on the HumVar dataset, Parepro achieved a Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) of 50% and an overall accuracy (Q2) of 76%, both of which were higher than those predicted by the methods, such as PolyPhen, SIFT, and HydridMeth. Further analysis on an additional dataset (NewHumVar) using Parepro yielded similar results.
The performance of Parepro indicates that it is a powerful tool for predicting the effect of nsSNPs on protein function and would be useful for large-scale analysis of genomic nsSNP data.

Intrinsically unstructured proteins (IUPs) lack a well-defined three-dimensional structure. Some of them may assume a locally stable structure under specific conditions, e.g. upon interaction with another molecule, while others function in a permanently unstructured state. The discovery of IUPs challenged the traditional protein structure paradigm, which stated that a specific well-defined structure defines the function of the protein. As of December 2011, approximately 60 methods for computational prediction of protein disorder from sequence have been made publicly available. They are based on different approaches, such as utilizing evolutionary information, energy functions, and various statistical and machine learning methods.
Given the diversity of existing intrinsic disorder prediction methods, we decided to test whether it is possible to combine them into a more accurate meta-prediction method. We developed a method based on arbitrarily chosen 13 disorder predictors, in which the final consensus was weighted by the accuracy of the methods. We have also developed a disorder predictor GSmetaDisorder3D that used no third-party disorder predictors, but alignments to known protein structures, reported by the protein fold-recognition methods, to infer the potentially structured and unstructured regions. Following the success of our disorder predictors in the CASP8 benchmark, we combined them into a meta-meta predictor called GSmetaDisorderMD, which was the top scoring method in the subsequent CASP9 benchmark.
A series of disorder predictors described in this article is available as a MetaDisorder web server at http://iimcb.genesilico.pl/metadisorder/. Results are presented both in an easily interpretable, interactive mode and in a simple text format suitable for machine processing.

Intrinsically disordered regions are key for the function of numerous proteins, and the scant available experimental annotations suggest the existence of different disorder flavors. While efficient predictions are required to annotate entire genomes, most existing methods require sequence profiles for disorder prediction, making them cumbersome for high-throughput applications.
In this work, we present an ensemble of protein disorder predictors called ESpritz. These are based on bidirectional recursive neural networks and trained on three different flavors of disorder, including a novel NMR flexibility predictor. ESpritz can produce fast and accurate sequence-only predictions, annotating entire genomes in the order of hours on a single processor core. Alternatively, a slower but slightly more accurate ESpritz variant using sequence profiles can be used for applications requiring maximum performance. Two levels of prediction confidence allow either to maximize reasonable disorder detection or to limit expected false positives to 5%. ESpritz performs consistently well on the recent CASP9 data, reaching a Sw measure of 54.82 and area under the receiver operator curve of 0.856. The fast predictor is four orders of magnitude faster and remains better than most publicly available CASP9 methods, making it ideal for genomic scale predictions.
ESpritz predicts three flavors of disorder at two distinct false positive rates, either with a fast or slower and slightly more accurate approach. Given its state-of-the-art performance, it can be especially useful for high-throughput applications.
Both a web server for high-throughput analysis and a Linux executable version of ESpritz are available from: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/espritz/

Protein aggregation correlates with the development of several debilitating human disorders of growing incidence, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. On the biotechnological side, protein production is often hampered by the accumulation of recombinant proteins into aggregates. Thus, the development of methods to anticipate the aggregation properties of polypeptides is receiving increasing attention. AGGRESCAN is a web-based software for the prediction of aggregation-prone segments in protein sequences, the analysis of the effect of mutations on protein aggregation propensities and the comparison of the aggregation properties of different proteins or protein sets.
AGGRESCAN is based on an aggregation-propensity scale for natural amino acids derived from in vivo experiments and on the assumption that short and specific sequence stretches modulate protein aggregation. The algorithm is shown to identify a series of protein fragments involved in the aggregation of disease-related proteins and to predict the effect of genetic mutations on their deposition propensities. It also provides new insights into the differential aggregation properties displayed by globular proteins, natively unfolded polypeptides, amyloidogenic proteins and proteins found in bacterial inclusion bodies.
By identifying aggregation-prone segments in proteins, AGGRESCAN http://bioinf.uab.es/aggrescan/ shall facilitate (i) the identification of possible therapeutic targets for anti-depositional strategies in conformational diseases and (ii) the anticipation of aggregation phenomena during storage or recombinant production of bioactive polypeptides or polypeptide sets.

Many different proteins aggregate into amyloid fibrils characterized by cross-β structure. β-strands contributed by distinct protein molecules are generally found in a parallel in-register alignment. Here, we describe the web server for a novel algorithm, prediction of amyloid structure aggregation (PASTA), to predict the most aggregation-prone portions and the corresponding β-strand inter-molecular pairing for a given input sequence. PASTA was previously shown to yield results in excellent agreement with available experimental observations, when tested on both natively unfolded and structured proteins. The web server and downloadable source code are freely accessible from the URL: http://protein.cribi.unipd.it/pasta/.

The formation of amyloid aggregates upon protein misfolding is related to several devastating degenerative diseases. The propensities of different protein sequences to aggregate into amyloids, how they are enhanced by pathogenic mutations, the presence of aggregation hot spots stabilizing pathological interactions, the establishing of cross-amyloid interactions between co-aggregating proteins, all rely at the molecular level on the stability of the amyloid cross-beta structure. Our redesigned server, PASTA 2.0, provides a versatile platform where all of these different features can be easily predicted on a genomic scale given input sequences. The server provides other pieces of information, such as intrinsic disorder and secondary structure predictions, that complement the aggregation data. The PASTA 2.0 energy function evaluates the stability of putative cross-beta pairings between different sequence stretches. It was re-derived on a larger dataset of globular protein domains. The resulting algorithm was benchmarked on comprehensive peptide and protein test sets, leading to improved, state-of-the-art results with more amyloid forming regions correctly detected at high specificity. The PASTA 2.0 server can be accessed at http://protein.bio.unipd.it/pasta2/.

MolProbity is a general-purpose web server offering quality validation for 3D structures of proteins, nucleic acids and complexes. It provides detailed all-atom contact analysis of any steric problems within the molecules as well as updated dihedral-angle diagnostics, and it can calculate and display the H-bond and van der Waals contacts in the interfaces between components. An integral step in the process is the addition and full optimization of all hydrogen atoms, both polar and nonpolar. New analysis functions have been added for RNA, for interfaces, and for NMR ensembles. Additionally, both the web site and major component programs have been rewritten to improve speed, convenience, clarity and integration with other resources. MolProbity results are reported in multiple forms: as overall numeric scores, as lists or charts of local problems, as downloadable PDB and graphics files, and most notably as informative, manipulable 3D kinemage graphics shown online in the KiNG viewer. This service is available free to all users at http://molprobity.biochem.duke.edu.

In a previous paper, we introduced MUSCLE, a new program for creating multiple alignments of protein sequences, giving a brief summary of the algorithm and showing MUSCLE to achieve the highest scores reported to date on four alignment accuracy benchmarks. Here we present a more complete discussion of the algorithm, describing several previously unpublished techniques that improve biological accuracy and / or computational complexity. We introduce a new option, MUSCLE-fast, designed for high-throughput applications. We also describe a new protocol for evaluating objective functions that align two profiles.
We compare the speed and accuracy of MUSCLE with CLUSTALW, Progressive POA and the MAFFT script FFTNS1, the fastest previously published program known to the author. Accuracy is measured using four benchmarks: BAliBASE, PREFAB, SABmark and SMART. We test three variants that offer highest accuracy (MUSCLE with default settings), highest speed (MUSCLE-fast), and a carefully chosen compromise between the two (MUSCLE-prog). We find MUSCLE-fast to be the fastest algorithm on all test sets, achieving average alignment accuracy similar to CLUSTALW in times that are typically two to three orders of magnitude less. MUSCLE-fast is able to align 1,000 sequences of average length 282 in 21 seconds on a current desktop computer.
MUSCLE offers a range of options that provide improved speed and / or alignment accuracy compared with currently available programs. MUSCLE is freely available at http://www.drive5.com/muscle.

The steady growth of the number of available protein structures has constantly motivated the development of new algorithms for detecting structural correspondences in proteins. Detecting structural equivalences in two or more proteins is computationally demanding as it typically entails the exploration of the combinatorial space of all possible amino acid pairings in the parent proteins. The search is often aided by the introduction of various constraints such as considering protein fragments, rather than single amino acids, and/or seeking only sequential correspondences in the given proteins. An additional challenge is represented by the difficulty of associating to a given alignment, a reliable a priori measure of its statistical significance.
Here, we present and discuss MISTRAL (Multiple STRuctural ALignment), a novel strategy for multiple protein alignment based on the minimization of an energy function over the low-dimensional space of the relative rotations and translations of the molecules. The energy minimization avoids combinatorial searches and returns pairwise alignment scores for which a reliable a priori statistical significance can be given.
MISTRAL is freely available for academic users as a standalone program and as a web service at http://ipht.cea.fr/protein.php.

This article introduces a new interface for T-Coffee, a consistency-based multiple sequence alignment program. This interface provides an easy and intuitive access to the most popular functionality of the package. These include the default T-Coffee mode for protein and nucleic acid sequences, the M-Coffee mode that allows combining the output of any other aligners, and template-based modes of T-Coffee that deliver high accuracy alignments while using structural or homology derived templates. These three available template modes are Expresso for the alignment of protein with a known 3D-Structure, R-Coffee to align RNA sequences with conserved secondary structures and PSI-Coffee to accurately align distantly related sequences using homology extension. The new server benefits from recent improvements of the T-Coffee algorithm and can align up to 150 sequences as long as 10 000 residues and is available from both http://www.tcoffee.org and its main mirror http://tcoffee.crg.cat .

Electrostatic calculations are an important tool for deciphering many functional mechanisms in proteins. Generalized Born (GB) models offer a fast and convenient computational approximation over other implicit solvent-based electrostatic models. Here we present a novel GB-based web server, using the program Bluues, to calculate numerous electrostatic features including pKa-values and surface potentials. The output is organized allowing both experts and beginners to rapidly sift the data. A novel feature of the Bluues server is that it explicitly allows to find electrostatic differences between wild-type and mutant structures.
The Bluues server, examples and extensive help files are available for non-commercial use at URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/bluues/.

Prediction of the biological effect of missense substitutions has become important because they are often observed in known or candidate disease susceptibility genes. In this paper, we carried out a 3-step analysis of 1514 missense substitutions in the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of TP53, the most frequently mutated gene in human cancers. First, we calculated two types of conservation scores based on a TP53 multiple sequence alignment (MSA) for each substitution: (i) Grantham Variation (GV), which measures the degree of biochemical variation among amino acids found at a given position in the MSA; (ii) Grantham Deviation (GD), which reflects the ‘biochemical distance’ of the mutant amino acid from the observed amino acid at a particular position (given by GV). Second, we used a method that combines GV and GD scores, Align-GVGD, to predict the transactivation activity of each missense substitution. We compared our predictions against experimentally measured transactivation activity (yeast assays) to evaluate their accuracy. Finally, the prediction results were compared with those obtained by the program Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant (SIFT) and Dayhoff's classification. Our predictions yielded high prediction accuracy for mutants showing a loss of transactivation (∼88% specificity) with lower prediction accuracy for mutants with transactivation similar to that of the wild-type (67.9 to 71.2% sensitivity). Align-GVGD results were comparable to SIFT (88.3 to 90.6% and 67.4 to 70.3% specificity and sensitivity, respectively) and outperformed Dayhoff's classification (80 and 40.9% specificity and sensitivity, respectively). These results further demonstrate the utility of the Align-GVGD method, which was previously applied to BRCA1. Align-GVGD is available online at http://agvgd.iarc.fr.

The NCBI dbSNP database lists over 9 million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome, but currently contains limited annotation information. SNPs that result in amino acid residue changes (nsSNPs) are of critical importance in variation between individuals, including disease and drug sensitivity.
We have developed LS-SNP, a genomic scale software pipeline to annotate nsSNPs. LS-SNP comprehensively maps nsSNPs onto protein sequences, functional pathways and comparative protein structure models, and predicts positions where nsSNPs destabilize proteins, interfere with the formation of domain–domain interfaces, have an effect on protein–ligand binding or severely impact human health. It currently annotates 28 043 validated SNPs that produce amino acid residue substitutions in human proteins from the SwissProt/TrEMBL database. Annotations can be viewed via a web interface either in the context of a genomic region or by selecting sets of SNPs, genes, proteins or pathways. These results are useful for identifying candidate functional SNPs within a gene, haplotype or pathway and in probing molecular mechanisms responsible for functional impacts of nsSNPs.
http://www.salilab.org/LS-SNP

Variations are mostly due to nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs), some of which are associated with certain diseases. Phenotypic effects of a large number of nsSNPs have not been characterized. Although several methods have been developed to predict the effects of nsSNPs as “disease” or “neutral,” there is still a need for development of methods with improved prediction accuracies. We, therefore, developed a support vector machine (SVM) based method named Hansa which uses a novel set of discriminatory features to classify nsSNPs into disease (pathogenic) and benign (neutral) types. Validation studies on a benchmark dataset and further on an independent dataset of well-characterized known disease and neutral mutations show that Hansa outperforms the other known methods. For example, fivefold cross-validation studies using the benchmark HumVar dataset reveal that at the false positive rate (FPR) of 20% Hansa yields a true positive rate (TPR) of 82% that is about 10% higher than the best-known method. Hansa is available in the form of a web server at http://hansa.cdfd.org.in:8080. Hum Mutat 33:332–337, 2012. © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

The rate at which nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) are being identified in the human genome is increasing dramatically owing to advances in whole-genome/whole-exome sequencing technologies. Automated methods capable of accurately and reliably distinguishing between pathogenic and functionally neutral nsSNPs are therefore assuming ever-increasing importance. Here, we describe the Functional Analysis Through Hidden Markov Models (FATHMM) software and server: a species-independent method with optional species-specific weightings for the prediction of the functional effects of protein missense variants. Using a model weighted for human mutations, we obtained performance accuracies that outperformed traditional prediction methods (i.e., SIFT, PolyPhen, and PANTHER) on two separate benchmarks. Furthermore, in one benchmark, we achieve performance accuracies that outperform current state-of-the-art prediction methods (i.e., SNPs&GO and MutPred). We demonstrate that FATHMM can be efficiently applied to high-throughput/large-scale human and nonhuman genome sequencing projects with the added benefit of phenotypic outcome associations. To illustrate this, we evaluated nsSNPs in wheat (Triticum spp.) to identify some of the important genetic variants responsible for the phenotypic differences introduced by intense selection during domestication. A Web-based implementation of FATHMM, including a high-throughput batch facility and a downloadable standalone package, is available at http://fathmm.biocompute.org.uk.

One of the major challenges in human genetics is to identify functional effects of coding and non-coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs). In the past, several methods have been developed to identify disease-related single amino acid changes but only few tools are able to score the impact of non-coding variants. Among the most popular algorithms, CADD and FATHMM predict the effect of SNVs in non-coding regions combining sequence conservation with several functional features derived from the ENCODE project data. Thus, to run CADD or FATHMM locally, the installation process requires to download a large set of pre-calculated information. To facilitate the process of variant annotation we develop PhD-SNPg, a new easy-to-install and lightweight machine learning method that depends only on sequence-based features. Despite this, PhD-SNPg performs similarly or better than more complex methods. This makes PhD-SNPg ideal for quick SNV interpretation, and as benchmark for tool development. Availability: PhD-SNPg is accessible at http://snps.biofold.org/phd-snpg.

The frustratometer is an energy landscape theory-inspired algorithm that aims at quantifying the location of frustration manifested in protein molecules. Frustration is a useful concept for gaining insight to the proteins biological behavior by analyzing how the energy is distributed in protein structures and how mutations or conformational changes shift the energetics. Sites of high local frustration often indicate biologically important regions involved in binding or allostery. In contrast, minimally frustrated linkages comprise a stable folding core of the molecule that is conserved in conformational changes. Here, we describe the implementation of these ideas in a webserver freely available at the National EMBNet node—Argentina, at URL: http://lfp.qb.fcen.uba.ar/embnet/.

The protein frustratometer is an energy landscape theory-inspired algorithm that aims at localizing and quantifying the energetic frustration present in protein molecules. Frustration is a useful concept for analyzing proteins’ biological behavior. It compares the energy distributions of the native state with respect to structural decoys. The network of minimally frustrated interactions encompasses the folding core of the molecule. Sites of high local frustration often correlate with functional regions such as binding sites and regions involved in allosteric transitions. We present here an upgraded version of a webserver that measures local frustration. The new implementation that allows the inclusion of electrostatic energy terms, important to the interactions with nucleic acids, is significantly faster than the previous version enabling the analysis of large macromolecular complexes within a user-friendly interface. The webserver is freely available at URL: http://frustratometer.qb.fcen.uba.ar.

The Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base, PharmGKB, is an interactive tool for researchers investigating how genetic variation affects drug response. The PharmGKB Web site, http://www.pharmgkb.org, displays genotype, molecular, and clinical knowledge integrated into pathway representations and Very Important Pharmacogene (VIP) summaries with links to additional external resources. Users can search and browse the knowledgebase by genes, variants, drugs, diseases, and pathways. Registration is free to the entire research community, but subject to agreement to use for research purposes only and not to redistribute. Registered users can access and download data to aid in the design of future pharmacogenetics and pharmacogenomics studies.

Accurate prediction of protein stability is important for understanding the molecular underpinnings of diseases and for the design of new proteins. We introduce a novel approach for the prediction of changes in protein stability that arise from a single-site amino acid substitution; the approach uses available data on mutations occurring in the same position and in other positions. Our algorithm, named Pro-Maya (Protein Mutant stAbilitY Analyzer), combines a collaborative filtering baseline model, Random Forests regression and a diverse set of features. Pro-Maya predicts the stability free energy difference of mutant versus wild type, denoted as ΔΔG.
We evaluated our algorithm extensively using cross-validation on two previously utilized datasets of single amino acid mutations and a (third) validation set. The results indicate that using known ΔΔG values of mutations at the query position improves the accuracy of ΔΔG predictions for other mutations in that position. The accuracy of our predictions in such cases significantly surpasses that of similar methods, achieving, e.g. a Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.79 and a root mean square error of 0.96 on the validation set. Because Pro-Maya uses a diverse set of features, including predictions using two other methods, it also performs slightly better than other methods in the absence of additional experimental data on the query positions.
Pro-Maya is freely available via web server at http://bental.tau.ac.il/ProMaya.

Accessible surface area (ASA) or solvent accessibility of amino acids in a protein has important implications. Knowledge of surface residues helps in locating potential candidates of active sites. Therefore, a method to quickly see the surface residues in a two dimensional model would help to immediately understand the population of amino acid residues on the surface and in the inner core of the proteins.
ASAView is an algorithm, an application and a database of schematic representations of solvent accessibility of amino acid residues within proteins. A characteristic two-dimensional spiral plot of solvent accessibility provides a convenient graphical view of residues in terms of their exposed surface areas. In addition, sequential plots in the form of bar charts are also provided. Online plots of the proteins included in the entire Protein Data Bank (PDB), are provided for the entire protein as well as their chains separately.
These graphical plots of solvent accessibility are likely to provide a quick view of the overall topological distribution of residues in proteins. Chain-wise computation of solvent accessibility is also provided.

Non-synonymous single-nucleotide polymorphisms (nsSNPs) within the coding regions of genes causing amino acid substitutions (AASs) may have a large impact on protein function. The possibilities to identify nsSNPs across genomes have increased notably with the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies. Thus, there is a strong need for efficient bioinformatics tools to predict the functional effect of AASs. Such tools can be used to identify the most promising candidate mutations for further experimental validation.
Here we present prediction of AAS effects (PASE), a novel method that predicts the effect of an AASs based on physicochemical property changes. Evaluation of PASE, using a few AASs of known phenotypic effects and 3338 human AASs, for which functional effects have previously been scored with the widely used SIFT and PolyPhen tools, show that PASE is a useful method for functional prediction of AASs. We also show that the predictions can be further improved by combining PASE with information about evolutionary conservation.
PASE is a novel algorithm for predicting functional effects of AASs, which can be used for pinpointing the most interesting candidate mutations. PASE predictions are based on changes in seven physicochemical properties and can improve predictions from many other available tools, which are based on evolutionary conservation. Using available experimental data and predictions from the already existing tools, we demonstrate that PASE is a useful method for predicting functional effects of AASs, even when a limited number of query sequence homologs/orthologs are available.

Human single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) represent the most frequent type of human population DNA variation. One of the main goals of SNP research is to understand the genetics of the human phenotype variation and especially the genetic basis of human complex diseases. Non‐synonymous coding SNPs (nsSNPs) comprise a group of SNPs that, together with SNPs in regulatory regions, are believed to have the highest impact on phenotype. Here we present a World Wide Web server to predict the effect of an nsSNP on protein structure and function. The prediction method enabled analysis of the publicly available SNP database HGVbase, which gave rise to a dataset of nsSNPs with predicted functionality. The dataset was further used to compare the effect of various structural and functional characteristics of amino acid substitutions responsible for phenotypic display of nsSNPs. We also studied the dependence of selective pressure on the structural and functional properties of proteins. We found that in our dataset the selection pressure against deleterious SNPs depends on the molecular function of the protein, although it is insensitive to several other protein features considered. The strongest selective pressure was detected for proteins involved in transcription regulation.

Subcellular localization is an important protein property, which is related to function, interactions and other features. As experimental determination of the localization can be tedious, especially for large numbers of proteins, a number of prediction tools have been developed. We developed the PROlocalizer service that integrates 11 individual methods to predict altogether 12 localizations for animal proteins. The method allows the submission of a number of proteins and mutations and generates a detailed informative document of the prediction and obtained results. PROlocalizer is available at http://bioinf.uta.fi/PROlocalizer/.

RankViaContact is a web service for calculation of residue–residue contact energies in proteins based on a coarse-grained model, and for visualization of interactions. The service provides information about ranked contact energies of residues, coordination numbers and the relative solvent accessibility of selected residues, as well as sequence and structure information. The program can be used to design stabilizing mutations, to analyze residue–residue contacts and to study the consequences of mutations.
http://bioinf.uta.fi/Rank.htm

Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) prioritization based on the phenotypic risk is essential for association studies. Assessment of the risk requires access to a variety of heterogeneous biological databases and analytical tools. FASTSNP (function analysis and selection tool for single nucleotide polymorphisms) is a web server that allows users to efficiently identify and prioritize high-risk SNPs according to their phenotypic risks and putative functional effects. A unique feature of FASTSNP is that the functional effect information used for SNP prioritization is always up-to-date, because FASTSNP extracts the information from 11 external web servers at query time using a team of web wrapper agents. Moreover, FASTSNP is extendable by simply deploying more Web wrapper agents. To validate the results of our prioritization, we analyzed 1569 SNPs from the SNP500Cancer database. The results show that SNPs with a high predicted risk exhibit low allele frequencies for the minor alleles, consistent with a well-known finding that a strong selective pressure exists for functional polymorphisms. We have been using FASTSNP for 2 years and FASTSNP enables us to discover a novel promoter polymorphism. FASTSNP is available at http://fastsnp.ibms.sinica.edu.tw .

The first release of the Thermodynamic Database for Proteins and Mutants (ProTherm) contains more than 3300 data of several thermodynamic parameters for wild type and mutant proteins. Each entry includes numerical data for unfolding Gibbs free energy change, enthalpy change, heat capacity change, transition temperature, activity etc., which are important for understanding the mechanism of protein stability. ProTherm also includes structural information such as secondary structure and solvent accessibility of wild type residues, and experimental methods and other conditions. A WWW interface enables users to search data based on various conditions with different sorting options for outputs. Further, ProTherm is cross-linked with NCBI PUBMED literature database, Protein Mutant Database, Enzyme Code and Protein Data Bank structural database. Moreover, all the mutation sites associated with each PDB structure are automatically mapped and can be directly viewed through 3DinSight developed in our laboratory. The database is available at the URL, http://www.rtc.riken.go.jp/protherm.html

A web-based tool, termed ‘MutaProt’, is described which analyses pairs of PDB files whose members differ in one, or two, amino acids. MutaProt examines the micro environment surrounding the exchanged residue(s) and can be searched by specifying a PDB ID, keywords, or any pair of amino acids. Detailed information about accessibility of the exchanged residue(s) and its atomic contacts are provided based on CSU software (Sobolev et al. , Bioinformatics , 15, 327–332, 1999). An interactive 3D presentation of the superimposed regions around the mutation(s) is included. MutaProt is updated weekly.
http://www.bioinfo.weizmann.ac.il/MutaProt

A web application for inferring potentially stabilizing non-bonding interactions in macromolecular structures from input atomic coordinate data is described. The core software, called MONSTER, comprises a PERL wrapper that takes advantage of scripts developed in-house as well as established software in the public domain to validate atomic coordinate files, identify interacting residues and assign the nature of these interactions. The results are assembled and presented in an intuitive and interactive graphical format. Potential applications of MONSTER range from mining and validating experimentally determined structures to guiding functional analysis. Non-commercial users can perform MONSTER analysis free of charge at http://monster.northwestern.edu.

A great challenge in the proteomics and structural genomics era is to predict protein structure and function, including identification of those proteins that are partially or wholly unstructured. Disordered regions in proteins often contain short linear peptide motifs (e.g., SH3 ligands and targeting signals) that are important for protein function. We present here DisEMBL, a computational tool for prediction of disordered/unstructured regions within a protein sequence. As no clear definition of disorder exists, we have developed parameters based on several alternative definitions and introduced a new one based on the concept of "hot loops," i.e., coils with high temperature factors. Avoiding potentially disordered segments in protein expression constructs can increase expression, foldability, and stability of the expressed protein. DisEMBL is thus useful for target selection and the design of constructs as needed for many biochemical studies, particularly structural biology and structural genomics projects. The tool is freely available via a web interface (http://dis.embl.de) and can be downloaded for use in large-scale studies.

A sizeable fraction of eukaryotic proteins contain intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs), which act in unfolded states or by undergoing transitions between structured and unstructured conformations. Over time, sequence-based classifiers of IDRs have become fairly accurate and currently a major challenge is linking IDRs to their biological roles from the molecular to the systems level.
We describe DISOPRED3, which extends its predecessor with new modules to predict IDRs and protein-binding sites within them. Based on recent CASP evaluation results, DISOPRED3 can be regarded as state of the art in the identification of IDRs, and our self-assessment shows that it significantly improves over DISOPRED2 because its predictions are more specific across the whole board and more sensitive to IDRs longer than 20 amino acids. Predicted IDRs are annotated as protein binding through a novel SVM based classifier, which uses profile data and additional sequence-derived features. Based on benchmarking experiments with full cross-validation, we show that this predictor generates precise assignments of disordered protein binding regions and that it compares well with other publicly available tools.
http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/disopred

PMUT allows the fast and accurate prediction (~80% success rate in humans) of the pathological character of single point amino acidic mutations based on the use of neural networks. The program also allows the fast scanning of mutational hot spots, which are obtained by three procedures: (1) alanine scanning, (2) massive mutation and (3) genetically accessible mutations. A graphical interface for Protein Data Bank (PDB) structures, when available, and a database containing hot spot profiles for all non-redundant PDB structures are also accessible from the PMUT server.
PMUT is freely accessible at http://mmb2.pcb.ub.es:8080/PMut/

We present here a full update of the PMut predictor, active since 2005 and with a large acceptance in the field of predicting Mendelian pathological mutations. PMut internal engine has been renewed, and converted into a fully featured standalone training and prediction engine that not only powers PMut web portal, but that can generate custom predictors with alternative training sets or validation schemas. PMut Web portal allows the user to perform pathology predictions, to access a complete repository of pre-calculated predictions, and to generate and validate new predictors. The default predictor performs with good quality scores (MCC values of 0.61 on 10-fold cross validation, and 0.42 on a blind test with SwissVar 2016 mutations). The PMut portal is freely accessible at http://mmb.irbbarcelona.org/PMut. A complete help and tutorial is available at http://mmb.irbbarcelona.org/PMut/help.

Single nucleotide variants (SNVs) are, together with copy number variation, the primary source of variation in the human genome and are associated with phenotypic variation such as altered response to drug treatment and susceptibility to disease. Linking structural effects of non-synonymous SNVs to functional outcomes is a major issue in structural bioinformatics. The SNPeffect database (http://snpeffect.switchlab.org) uses sequence- and structure-based bioinformatics tools to predict the effect of protein-coding SNVs on the structural phenotype of proteins. It integrates aggregation prediction (TANGO), amyloid prediction (WALTZ), chaperone-binding prediction (LIMBO) and protein stability analysis (FoldX) for structural phenotyping. Additionally, SNPeffect holds information on affected catalytic sites and a number of post-translational modifications. The database contains all known human protein variants from UniProt, but users can now also submit custom protein variants for a SNPeffect analysis, including automated structure modeling. The new meta-analysis application allows plotting correlations between phenotypic features for a user-selected set of variants.

The relationship between disease susceptibility and genetic variation is complex, and many different types of data are relevant. We describe a web resource and database that provides and integrates as much information as possible on disease/gene relationships at the molecular level.
The resource http://www.SNPs3D.org has three primary modules. One module identifies which genes are candidates for involvement in a specified disease. A second module provides information about the relationships between sets of candidate genes. The third module analyzes the likely impact of non-synonymous SNPs on protein function. Disease/candidate gene relationships and gene-gene relationships are derived from the literature using simple but effective text profiling. SNP/protein function relationships are derived by two methods, one using principles of protein structure and stability, the other based on sequence conservation. Entries for each gene include a number of links to other data, such as expression profiles, pathway context, mouse knockout information and papers. Gene-gene interactions are presented in an interactive graphical interface, providing rapid access to the underlying information, as well as convenient navigation through the network. Use of the resource is illustrated with aspects of the inflammatory response and hypertension.
The combination of SNP impact analysis, a knowledge based network of gene relationships and candidate genes, and access to a wide range of data and literature allow a user to quickly assimilate available information, and so develop models of gene-pathway-disease interaction.

Recent progress in identification and mapping of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the human genome generates an unprecedented opportunity to explore cause–effect relationships between genetic variations and susceptibility to common diseases. For this purpose, one promising strategy would be to select a set of SNPs that potentially alter the function of proteins involved in the pathogenesis of the diseases and compare their frequencies in the affected individuals and the healthy population. In this respect, SNPs that change amino acid sequences (nonsynonymous SNPs; nsSNPs) are of particular interest, since they are more likely to affect protein functions. In this study, we have constructed a catalog of nsSNPs (PicSNP), whose unique features are (i) nsSNPs are classified according to the functions of the affected genes and are searchable under the guidance of hierarchical lists of protein functions and (ii) nsSNPs that lead to amino acid changes in the known functional sites and domains of proteins are highlighted. Out of 1,190,295 SNPs extracted from public database, we identified 3793 nsSNPs and classified them in 1247 categories of protein functions. 495 sites and domains annotated in the Swiss-Prot database were found to include nsSNPs, including 2 nsSNPs in disulfide-binding sites and 38 nsSNPs in transmembrane regions. PicSNP is available via the World Wide Web (http://picsnp.org) and would support research questing for SNPs involved in common diseases.

The database of topographic mapping of Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (topoSNP) provides an online resource for analyzing non‐synonymous SNPs (nsSNPs) that can be mapped onto known 3D structures of proteins. These include disease‐ associated nsSNPs derived from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database and other nsSNPs derived from dbSNP, a resource at the National Center for Biotechnology Information that catalogs SNPs. TopoSNP further classifies each nsSNP site into three categories based on their geometric location: those located in a surface pocket or an interior void of the protein, those on a convex region or a shallow depressed region, and those that are completely buried in the interior of the protein structure. These unique geometric descriptions provide more detailed mapping of nsSNPs to protein structures. The current release also includes relative entropy of SNPs calculated from multiple sequence alignment as obtained from the Pfam database (a database of protein families and conserved protein motifs) as well as manually adjusted multiple alignments obtained from ClustalW. These structural and conservational data can be useful for studying whether nsSNPs in coding regions are likely to lead to phenotypic changes. TopoSNP includes an interactive structural visualization web interface, as well as downloadable batch data. The database will be updated at regular intervals and can be accessed at: http://gila.bioengr.uic.edu/snp/toposnp .

CUPSAT (Cologne University Protein Stability Analysis Tool) is a web tool to analyse and predict protein stability changes upon point mutations (single amino acid mutations). This program uses structural environment specific atom potentials and torsion angle potentials to predict ΔΔG, the difference in free energy of unfolding between wild-type and mutant proteins. It requires the protein structure in Protein Data Bank format and the location of the residue to be mutated. The output consists information about mutation site, its structural features (solvent accessibility, secondary structure and torsion angles), and comprehensive information about changes in protein stability for 19 possible substitutions of a specific amino acid mutation. Additionally, it also analyses the ability of the mutated amino acids to adapt the observed torsion angles. Results were tested on 1538 mutations from thermal denaturation and 1603 mutations from chemical denaturation experiments. Several validation tests (split-sample, jack-knife and k -fold) were carried out to ensure the reliability, accuracy and transferability of the prediction method that gives >80% prediction accuracy for most of these validation tests. Thus, the program serves as a valuable tool for the analysis of protein design and stability. The tool is accessible from the link http://cupsat.uni-koeln.de .

Accurate prediction of protein stability changes resulting from single amino acid mutations is important for understanding protein structures and designing new proteins. We use support vector machines to predict protein stability changes for single amino acid mutations leveraging both sequence and structural information. We evaluate our approach using cross-validation methods on a large dataset of single amino acid mutations. When only the sign of the stability changes is considered, the predictive method achieves 84% accuracy—a significant improvement over previously published results. Moreover, the experimental results show that the prediction accuracy obtained using sequence alone is close to the accuracy obtained using tertiary structure information. Because our method can accurately predict protein stability changes using primary sequence information only, it is applicable to many situations where the tertiary structure is unknown, overcoming a major limitation of previous methods which require tertiary information. The web server for predictions of protein stability changes upon mutations (MUpro), software, and datasets are available at http://www.igb.uci.edu/servers/servers.html. Proteins 2006. © 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

A novel tool for computer-aided design of single-site mutations in proteins and peptides is presented. It proceeds by performing in silico all possible point mutations in a given protein or protein region and estimating the stability changes with linear combinations of database-derived potentials, whose coefficients depend on the solvent accessibility of the mutated residues. Upon completion, it yields a list of the most stabilizing, destabilizing or neutral mutations. This tool is applied to mouse, hamster and human prion proteins to identify the point mutations that are the most likely to stabilize their cellular form. The selected mutations are essentially located in the second helix, which presents an intrinsic preference to form β-structures, with the best mutations being T183→F, T192→A and Q186→A. The T183 mutation is predicted to be by far the most stabilizing one, but should be considered with care as it blocks the glycosylation of N181 and this blockade is known to favor the cellular to scrapie conversion. Furthermore, following the hypothesis that the first helix might induce the formation of hydrophilic β-aggregates, several mutations that are neutral with respect to the structure's stability but improve the helix hydrophobicity are selected, among which is E146→L. These mutations are intended as good candidates to undergo experimental tests.

Circular permutation (CP) is a protein structural rearrangement phenomenon, through which nature allows structural homologs to have different locations of termini and thus varied activities, stabilities and functional properties. It can be applied in many fields of protein research and bioengineering. The limitation of applying CP lies in its technical complexity, high cost and uncertainty of the viability of the resulting protein variants. Not every position in a protein can be used to create a viable circular permutant, but there is still a lack of practical computational tools for evaluating the positional feasibility of CP before costly experiments are carried out. We have previously designed a comprehensive method for predicting viable CP cleavage sites in proteins. In this work, we implement that method into an efficient and user-friendly web server named CPred (CP site predictor), which is supposed to be helpful to promote fundamental researches and biotechnological applications of CP. The CPred is accessible at http://sarst.life.nthu.edu.tw/CPred.

A major challenge in the post-genomic era is a better understanding of how human genetic alterations involved in disease affect the gene products. The KD4v (Comprehensible Knowledge Discovery System for Missense Variant) server allows to characterize and predict the phenotypic effects (deleterious/neutral) of missense variants. The server provides a set of rules learned by Induction Logic Programming (ILP) on a set of missense variants described by conservation, physico-chemical, functional and 3D structure predicates. These rules are interpretable by non-expert humans and are used to accurately predict the deleterious/neutral status of an unknown mutation. The web server is available at http://decrypthon.igbmc.fr/kd4v.

As large-scale re-sequencing of genomes reveals many protein mutations, especially in human cancer tissues, prediction of their likely functional impact becomes important practical goal. Here, we introduce a new functional impact score (FIS) for amino acid residue changes using evolutionary conservation patterns. The information in these patterns is derived from aligned families and sub-families of sequence homologs within and between species using combinatorial entropy formalism. The score performs well on a large set of human protein mutations in separating disease-associated variants (∼19 200), assumed to be strongly functional, from common polymorphisms (∼35 600), assumed to be weakly functional (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of ∼0.86). In cancer, using recurrence, multiplicity and annotation for ∼10 000 mutations in the COSMIC database, the method does well in assigning higher scores to more likely functional mutations (‘drivers’). To guide experimental prioritization, we report a list of about 1000 top human cancer genes frequently mutated in one or more cancer types ranked by likely functional impact; and, an additional 1000 candidate cancer genes with rare but likely functional mutations. In addition, we estimate that at least 5% of cancer-relevant mutations involve switch of function, rather than simply loss or gain of function.

Several large ongoing initiatives that profit from next-generation sequencing technologies have driven--and in coming years will continue to drive--the emergence of long catalogs of missense single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) in the human genome. As a consequence, researchers have developed various methods and their related computational tools to classify these missense SNVs as probably deleterious or probably neutral polymorphisms. The outputs produced by each of these computational tools are of different natures and thus difficult to compare and integrate. Taking advantage of the possible complementarity between different tools might allow more accurate classifications. Here we propose an effective approach to integrating the output of some of these tools into a unified classification; this approach is based on a weighted average of the normalized scores of the individual methods (WAS). (In this paper, the approach is illustrated for the integration of five tools.) We show that this WAS outperforms each individual method in the task of classifying missense SNVs as deleterious or neutral. Furthermore, we demonstrate that this WAS can be used not only for classification purposes (deleterious versus neutral mutation) but also as an indicator of the impact of the mutation on the functionality of the mutant protein. In other words, it may be used as a deleteriousness score of missense SNVs. Therefore, we recommend the use of this WAS as a consensus deleteriousness score of missense mutations (Condel).

Most genomic alterations are tolerated while only a minor fraction disrupts molecular function sufficiently to drive disease. Protein kinases play a central biological function and the functional consequences of their variants are abundantly characterized. However, this heterogeneous information is often scattered across different sources, which makes the integrative analysis complex and laborious. wKinMut-2 constitutes a solution to facilitate the interpretation of the consequences of human protein kinase variation. Nine methods predict their pathogenicity, including a kinase-specific random forest approach. To understand the biological mechanisms causative of human diseases and cancer, information from pertinent reference knowledge bases and the literature is automatically mined, digested, and homogenized. Variants are visualized in their structural contexts and residues affecting catalytic and drug binding are identified. Known protein–protein interactions are reported. Altogether, this information is intended to assist the generation of new working hypothesis to be corroborated with ulterior experimental work. The wKinMut-2 system, along with a user manual and examples, is freely accessible at http://kinmut2.bioinfo.cnio.es, the code for local installations can be downloaded from https://github.com/Rbbt-Workflows/KinMut2.

Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) is a manually curated compendium of human genetic variants and the corresponding phenotypes, mostly human diseases. Instead of directly documenting the native sequences for gene entries, OMIM links its entries to protein and DNA sequences in other databases. However, because of the existence of gene isoforms and errors in OMIM records, mapping a specific OMIM mutation to its corresponding protein sequence is not trivial. Combining computer programs and extensive manual curation of OMIM full-text descriptions and original literature, we mapped 98% of OMIM amino acid substitutions (AASs) and all SwissProt Variant (SwissVar) disease-related AASs to reference sequences and confidently mapped 99.96% of all AASs to the genomic loci. Based on the results, we developed an online database and interactive web server (M2SG) to (i) retrieve the mapped OMIM and SwissVar variants for a given protein sequence; and (ii) obtain related proteins and mutations for an input disease phenotype. This database will be useful for analyzing sequences, understanding the effect of mutations, identifying important genetic variations and designing experiments on a protein of interest.
The database and web server are freely available at http://prodata.swmed.edu/M2S/mut2seq.cgi.

SNPnexus is a web-based annotation tool for the analysis and interpretation of both known and novel sequencing variations. Since its last release, SNPnexus has received continual updates to expand the range and depth of annotations provided. SNPnexus has undergone a complete overhaul of the underlying infrastructure to accommodate faster computational times. The scope for data annotation has been substantially expanded to enhance biological interpretations of queried variants. This includes the addition of pathway analysis for the identification of enriched biological pathways and molecular processes. We have further expanded the range of user directed annotation fields available for the study of cancer sequencing data. These new additions facilitate investigations into cancer driver variants and targetable molecular alterations within input datasets. New user directed filtering options have been coupled with the addition of interactive graphical and visualization tools. These improvements streamline the analysis of variants derived from large sequencing datasets for the identification of biologically and clinically significant subsets in the data. SNPnexus is the most comprehensible web-based application currently available and these new set of updates ensures that it remains a state-of-the-art tool for researchers. SNPnexus is freely available at https://www.snp-nexus.org.

Distinct missense mutations in a specific gene have been associated with different diseases as well as differing
severity of a disease. Current computational methods predict the potential pathogenicity of a missense variant but fail to differentiate between separate disease or severity phenotypes. We have developed a method to overcome this limitation by applying
machine learning to features extracted from molecular dynamics simulations, creating a way to predict the effect of novel genetic
variants in causing a disease, drug resistance, or another specific trait. As an example, we have applied this novel approach to
variants in calmodulin associated with two distinct arrhythmias as well as two different neurodegenerative diseases caused by
variants in amyloid-b peptide. The new method successfully predicts the specific disease caused by a gene variant and ranks its
severity with more accuracy than existing methods. We call this method molecular dynamics phenotype prediction model.
